ARTICLE
Received 9 Dec 2013 |Accepted 27 May 2014 |Published 23 Jul 2014
A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic
quantum processor
Alberto Peruzzo1,*,w, Jarrod McClean2,*, Peter Shadbolt1, Man-Hong Yung2,3, Xiao-Qi Zhou1, Peter J. Love4,
Ala´n Aspuru-Guzik2& Jeremy L. O’Brien1
Quantum computers promise to efﬁciently solve important problems that are intractable on a
conventional computer. For quantum systems, where the physical dimension grows expo-nentially, ﬁnding the eigenvalues of certain operators is one such intractable problem andremains a fundamental challenge. The quantum phase estimation algorithm efﬁciently ﬁndsthe eigenvalue of a given eigenvector but requires fully coherent evolution. Here we presentan alternative approach that greatly reduces the requirements for coherent evolution andcombine this method with a new approach to state preparation based on ansa ¨tze and
classical optimization. We implement the algorithm by combining a highly reconﬁgurable
photonic quantum processor with a conventional computer. We experimentally demonstratethe feasibility of this approach with an example from quantum chemistry—calculating theground-state molecular energy for He–H
þ. The proposed approach drastically reduces the
coherence time requirements, enhancing the potential of quantum resources available todayand in the near future.DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 OPEN
1Centre for Quantum Photonics, H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory & Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1UB,
UK.2Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.3Center for Quantum Information,
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China.4Department of Physics, Haverford College, Haverford,
Pennsylvania 19041, USA. * These authors contributed equally to this work. wPresent address: School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales 2006, Australia. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.P. (email: Alberto.Peruzzo@sydney.edu.au) or to A.A.-G .
(email: Aspuru@chemistry.harvard.edu) or to J.L.O’B. (email: Jeremy.obrien@bristol.ac.uk).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4213 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 1
&2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
In chemistry, the properties of atoms and molecules can be
determined by solving the Schro ¨dinger equation. However,
because the dimension of the problem grows exponentially
with the size of the physical system under consideration, exacttreatment of these problems remains classically infeasible for
compounds with more than 2–3 atoms1. Many approximate
methods2have been developed to treat these systems, but
efﬁcient, exact methods for large chemical problems remain out
of reach for classical computers. Beyond chemistry, the solution
of large eigenvalue problems3would have applications ranging
from determining the results of internet search engines4to
designing new materials and drugs5.
Recent developments in the ﬁeld of quantum computation
offer a way forward for determining efﬁcient solutions of many
instances of large eigenvalue problems that are classically
intractable6–12. Quantum approaches to ﬁnding eigenvalues
have previously relied on the quantum phase estimation (QPE)
algorithm. The QPE algorithm offers an exponential speedup
over classical methods and requires a number of quantum opera-
tions O(p/C01) to obtain an estimate with precision p(refs 13–18).
In the standard formulation of QPE, one assumes the eigenvector
|cSof a Hermitian operator His given as input and the problem
is to determine the corresponding eigenvalue l. The time the
quantum computer must remain coherent is determined by the
necessity of O(p/C01) successive applications of e/C0iHt, each of
which can require on the order of millions or billions of quantum
gates for practical applications17,19, as compared to the tens to
hundreds of gates achievable in the short term.
Here we introduce an alternative to QPE that signiﬁcantly
reduces the requirements for coherent evolution. We have
developed a reconﬁgurable quantum processing unit (QPU),
which efﬁciently calculates the expectation value of a
Hamiltonian ( H), providing an exponential speedup over
exact diagonalization, the only known exact solution to the
problem on a traditional computer. The QPU has been
experimentally implemented using integrated photonics technol-
ogy with a spontaneous parametric downconversion single-photon source and combined with an optimization algorithm
run on a classical processing unit (CPU), which variationally
computes the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H. By using a
variational algorithm, this approach reduces the requirement for
coherent evolution of the quantum state, making more efﬁcient
use of quantum resources, and may offer an alternative route to
practical quantum-enhanced computation.
Results
Quantum expectation estimation . The quantum expectation
estimation (QEE) algorithm computes the expectation value of agiven Hamiltonian Hfor an input state | cS. Any Hamiltonian
may be written as
H¼X
iahi
asiaþX
ijabhij
absi
asj
bþ... ð1Þ
for real h, where Roman indices identify the subsystem on which
the operator acts, and Greek indices identify the Pauli operator,
for example, a¼x. Note that no assumption about the dimension
or structure of the hermitian Hamiltonian is needed for this
expansion to be valid. By exploiting the linearity of quantum
observables, it follows that
hHi ¼X
iahi
ahsi
aiþX
ijabhij
abhsi
asj
biþ ... ð2Þ
We consider Hamiltonians that can be written as a polynomial
number of terms, with respect to the system size. This class of
Hamiltonians encompasses a wide range of physical systems,including the electronic structure Hamiltonian of quantum
chemistry, the quantum Ising Model, the Heisenberg Model20,21,
matrices that are well approximated as a sum of n-fold tensor
products22,23, and more generally any k-sparse Hamiltonian
without evident tensor product structure (see Supplementary
Methods for details). Thus, the evaluation of /HSreduces to the
sum of a polynomial number of expectation values of simple Pauli
operators for a quantum state | cS, multiplied by some real
constants. A quantum device can efﬁciently evaluate the
expectation value of a tensor product of an arbitrary number of
simple Pauli operators23. Therefore, with an n-qubit state we can
efﬁciently evaluate the expectation value of this 2n/C22n
Hamiltonian.
One might attempt this using a classical computer by
separately optimizing all reduced states corresponding to the
desired terms in the Hamiltonian, but this would suffer from the
N-representability problem, which is known to be intractable for
both classical and quantum computers (it is in the quantum
complexity class QMA-Hard24). The power of our approach
derives from the fact that quantum hardware can store a global
quantum state with exponentially fewer resources than required
by classical hardware, and as a result the N-representability
problem does not arise.
The expectation value of a tensor product of an arbitrary
number of Pauli operators can be estimated by local measure-
ment of each qubit6. Such independent measurements can be
performed in parallel, incurring a constant cost in time.
Furthermore, since these operators are normalized and ﬁnite-
dimensional, their spectra are bounded. As a result, each
hHm
ii¼hij...
ab...hsi
a/C10sj
b...ican be estimated to a precision pof
an individual element with coefﬁcient h, which is an arbitrary
element from the set of constants fhij:::
ab :::g,a tac o s to f
O(|hmax|2Mp/C02) repetitions. Here Mis the number of terms
in the decomposition of the Hamiltonian and hmax is the
coefﬁcient with maximum norm in the decomposition of the
Hamiltonian. The advantage of this approach is that the
coherence time to make a single measurement after preparingthe state is O(1). Conversely, the disadvantage of this approach
with respect to QPE is the scaling in the total number of
operations, as a function of the desired precision is quadratically
worse ( O(p/C02)v e r s u s O(p/C01)). Moreover, this scaling will also
reﬂect the number of state preparation repetitions required,
whereas in QPE the number of state preparation steps is
constant. In essence, we dramatically reduce the coherence time
requirement while maintaining an exponential advantage over
the classical case, by adding a polynomial number of repetitions
with respect to QPE.
Quantum variational eigensolver . The procedure outlined above
replaces the long coherent evolution required by QPE by many
short coherent evolutions. In both QPE and QEE we require a
good approximation to the ground-state wavefunction to com-
pute the ground-state eigenvalue, and we now consider this
problem. Previous approaches have proposed to prepare ground
states by adiabatic evolution15, or by the quantum Metropolis
algorithm25,26. Unfortunately both of these require long coherent
evolution. The quantum variational eigensolver (QVE) algorithm
is a variational method to prepare the eigenstate and, by
exploiting QEE, requires short coherent evolution. QEE and
QVE and their relationship are shown in Fig. 1 and detailed in the
Supplementary Methods.
It is well known that the eigenvalue problem for an observable
represented by an operator Hcan be restated as a variational
problem on the Rayleigh–Ritz quotient27,28, such that the
eigenvector | cScorresponding to the lowest eigenvalue is theARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4213 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
&2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
|cSthat minimizes
hcjHj ci
hcjci: ð3Þ
By varying the experimental parameters in the preparation of
|cSand computing the Rayleigh–Ritz quotient using QEE as
a subroutine in a classical minimization, one may prepare
unknown eigenvectors. At the termination of the algorithm, a
simple prescription for the reconstruction of the eigenvector is
stored in the ﬁnal set of experimental parameters that deﬁne | cS.
If a quantum state is characterized by an exponentially large
number of parameters, it cannot be prepared with a polynomial
number of operations. The set of efﬁciently preparable states are
therefore characterized by polynomially many parameters, and
we choose a particular set of ansatz states of this type. Under
these conditions, a classical search algorithm on the experimental
parameters that deﬁne | cSneeds only explore a polynomial
number of dimensions—a requirement for the search to be
efﬁcient. One example of a quantum state parameterized by a
polynomial number of parameters for which there is no known
efﬁcient classical implementation is the unitary coupled cluster
ansatz29
jCi¼eT/C0TwjFiref: ð4Þ
where | FSrefis some reference state, usually the Hartree Fock
ground state, and Tis the cluster operator for an Nelectron
system, deﬁned by
T¼T1þT2þT3þ:::þTN; ð5Þ
where
T1¼X
prtr
p^aw
p^ar ð6Þ
T2¼X
pqrstrs
pq^aw
p^aw
q^ar^as ð7Þ
and higher-order terms follow logically. It is clear that by
construction the operator ( T/C0Tw) is anti-hermitian,
and exponentiation maps it to a unitary operator U¼eðT/C0TTÞ.
For any ﬁxed excitation level k, the reduced cluster operator iswritten as
TðkÞ¼Xk
i¼1Ti: ð8Þ
In general no efﬁcient implementation of this ansatz has yet been
developed for a classical computer, even for low-order cluster
operators, due to the non-truncation of the BCH series29.
However, this state may be prepared efﬁciently on a quantum
device. The reduced anti-hermitian cluster operator ( T(k)/C0T(k)w)
is the sum of a polynomial number of terms—namely, it contains
a number of terms O(Nk(M/C0N)k), where Mis the number of
single-particle orbitals. By deﬁning an effective Hermitian
Hamiltonian H¼ i(T(k)/C0T(k)w) and performing the Jordan–
Wigner transformation to reach a Hamiltonian that acts on the
space of qubits, ~H, we are left with a Hamiltonian that is a sum of
polynomially many products of Pauli operators. The problem
then reduces to the quantum simulation of this effective
Hamiltonian, ~H, which can be done in polynomial time using
the procedure outlined by Ortiz et al.23We note that while this
state preparation procedure utilizes tools from quantum
simulation, the total effective time of evolution is ﬁxed by the
expansion coefﬁcients trs
pq. This is in contrast to the normal
difﬁculties encountered in QPE, where simulations must be
carried out for times that are exponential in the desired bits of
precision.
While there is currently no known efﬁcient classical algorithm
based on these ansatz states, non-unitary coupled cluster ansatz is
sometimes referred to as the ‘gold standard of quantum
chemistry’ as it is the standard of accuracy to which other
methods in quantum chemistry are often compared. The unitary
version of this ansatz is thought to yield superior results to even
this ‘gold standard’29.
Prototype demonstration . We have implemented the QPU using
integrated quantum photonics technology30. Our device, shown
schematically in Fig. 2, is a reconﬁgurable waveguide chip that
can prepare and measure arbitrary two-bit pure states using
several single-qubit rotations and one two-qubit entangling gate.
The state is path-encoded using photon pairs generated via a
spontaneous parametric downconversion process. StateQPU
〈H1〉
〈H2〉
〈H3〉
〈HN〉〈H1〉
+
+
+
+〈H2〉
〈H3〉
〈HN〉Quantum expectation estimationQuantum variational eigensolver
CPU
Quantum module 1Quantum state preparation
Classical adder
Classical feedback decisionQuantum module 2
Quantum module 3
Quantum module N
Adjust the parameters for the next input state
Figure 1 | Architecture of the quantum-variational eigensolver. In QEE, quantum states that have been previously prepared are fed into the quantum
modules, which compute /HiS, where Hiis any given term in the sum deﬁning H. The results are passed to the CPU, which computes /HS. In the
quantum variational eigensolver, the classical minimization algorithm, run on the CPU, takes /HSand determines the new state parameters, which are
then fed back to the QPU.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4213 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3
&2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
preparation and measurement in the Pauli basis is achieved by
setting 8 voltage-driven phase shifters and counting photon
detection events with silicon single-photon detectors31.
The ability to prepare an arbitrary two-qubit separable or
entangled state enables us to investigate 4 /C24 Hamiltonians. For
the experimental demonstration of our algorithm we choose a
problem from quantum chemistry—namely, determining the
bond dissociation curve of the molecule He–Hþin a minimal
basis. The full conﬁguration interaction Hamiltonian for this
system has dimension 4, and can be written compactly as
HðRÞ¼X
iahi
aðRÞsi
aþX
ijabhij
abðRÞsi
asj
b: ð9Þ
The coefﬁcients hi
aðRÞand hij
abðRÞwere determined using the
PSI3 computational package32and are tabulated in
Supplementary Table 2.
In order to compute the bond dissociation of the molecule, we
use QVE to compute its ground state for a range of values of the
nuclear separation R. In Fig. 3 we report a representative
optimization run for a particular nuclear separation, demonstrat-
ing the convergence of our algorithm to the ground state of H(R)
in the presence of experimental noise. Figure 3a demonstrates the
convergence of the average energy, while Fig. 3b demonstrates the
convergence of the overlap | /cj|cGS| of the current state | cjSwith the target state | cGS. The colour of each entry in Fig. 3a
represents the tangle (absolute concurrence squared) of the state
at that step of the algorithm. It is known that the volume of
separable states is doubly exponentially small with respect to the
rest of state space33. Thus, the ability to traverse non-separable
state space increases the number of paths by which the algorithm
can converge and will be a requirement for future large-scale
implementations. Moreover, it is clear that the ability to produce
entangled states is a necessity for the accurate description of
general quantum systems where eigenstates may be non-
separable—for example, the ground state of the He–Hþ
Hamiltonian has small but not negligible tangle.
Repeating this procedure for several values of R, we obtain the
bond dissociation curve, which is reported in Fig. 4. After the
computed energies have been corrected for experimental errors,
the determination of the equilibrium bond length of the molecule
was found to be R¼92.3±0.1 pm, with a corresponding ground-
state electronic energy of E¼/C0 2.865±0.008 MJ mol/C01. Full
details of the correction for systematic errors and estimation of
the uncertainty on Eare reported in the Supplementary Methods.
The corresponding theoretical curve shows the numerically exact
energy derived from a full conﬁguration interaction calculation of
the molecular system in the same basis. More than 96% of the
experimental data are within chemical accuracy with respect to
D1
D2
D3
D4CPU
Optimization
algorithmdc1|00〉 〈/afii9852|/afii9846i ⊗ /afii9846j|/afii9852〉
dc2
dc3dc9dc6
dc7
dc8dc10
dc11 dc12 dc13 dc4 dc5QPUa
b
from CPU
1 cm/p101 /p102
/p103 /p104/p105 /p106
/p107 /p108〈H〉
{/afii9835ij}
{/p10ij}
From CPU
To detectors
QPUFrom SPDC
source
Figure 2 | Experimental implementation of our scheme. (a) Quantum-state preparation and measurement of the expectation values /c|si#sj|cS
are performed using a quantum photonic chip. Photon pairs, generated using spontaneous parametric downconversion, are injected into the waveguide s
encoding the |00 Sstate. The state | cSis prepared using thermal phase shifters f1/C08(orange rectangles) and one CNOT gate and measured using
photon detectors. dc {1–4,9–13} (dc 5–7) are 50% (30%) reﬂectivity directional couplers. Coincidence count rates from the detectors D 1–4are passed
to the CPU running the optimization algorithm. This computes the set of parameters for the next state and writes them to the quantum device.
(b) A photograph of the QPU.ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213
4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4213 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
&2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
the theoretical values. At the conclusion of the optimization, we
retain full knowledge of the experimental parameters, which can
be used for efﬁcient reconstruction of the state | cSin the event
that additional physical or chemical properties are required.
Discussion
QEE uses relatively few quantum resources compared to QPE.
Broadly speaking, QPE requires a large number of n-qubit
quantum controlled operations to be performed in series—
placing considerable demands on the number of components and
coherence time—while the inherent parallelism of our scheme
enables a small number of n-qubit gates to be exploited many
times, drastically reducing these demands. Moreover, adding
control to arbitrary unitary operations in practice is difﬁcult, if
not impossible, for current quantum architectures (although a
proposed scheme to add control to arbitrary unitary operations
has recently been demonstrated34). To give a numerical example,
the QPE circuit for a 4 /C24 Hamiltonian such as that
demonstrated here would require at least 12 CNOT gates, while
our method only requires one. We note that the resource saving
provided by QEE incurs a cost of polynomial repetitions of the
state preparation, as compared to the single copy required byQPE. In many cases (for example, our photonic implementation),
repeated preparation of a state is not signiﬁcantly harder than
preparation of a single copy, requiring only a polynomial
overhead in time without any modiﬁcation of the device.
In implementing QVE, the device prepares ansatz states that
are deﬁned by a polynomial set of parameters. This ansatz might
be chosen based on knowledge of the physical system of interest
(as for the unitary coupled cluster and typical quantum chemistry
ansa¨tze), thus determining the device design. However, our
architecture allows for an alternative and potentially more
promising approach, where the device is ﬁrst constructed based
on the available resources and we deﬁne the set of states that the
device can prepare as the ‘device ansatz’. Due to the quantum
nature of the device, this ansatz can be very distinct from those
used in traditional quantum chemistry. With this alternative
approach the physical implementation is then given by a known
sequence of quantum operations with adjustable parameters—
determined at the construction of the device—with a maximum
depth ﬁxed by the coherence time of the physical qubits. This
approach, while approximate, provides a variationally optimal
solution for the given quantum resources and may still be able to
provide qualitatively correct solutions, just as approximate
methods do in traditional quantum chemistry (for example,
Hartree Fock). The unitary coupled cluster ansatz (equation (4))
provides a concrete example where our approach provides an
exponential advantage over known classical techniques. For this
ansatz, with as few as 40–50 qubits, one expects to manipulate a
state that is not efﬁcient to simulate classically, and can provide a
solution superior to the classical gold standard, non-unitary
coupled cluster.
We have developed and experimentally implemented a new
approach to solving the eigenvalue problem with quantum
hardware. QEE shares with QPE the need to prepare a good
01
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0−3−2.5−2−1.5−1−0.5
Optimization step jEnergy (MJ mol−1)Energy levels
Theoretical 〈   〉
Experimental 〈   〉
Tangle
0 20 40 60 80 10000.20.40.60.81
Optimization step jState overlapa
b
+
HeHHeH
Figure 3 | Finding the ground state of He–Hþfor a speciﬁc molecular
separation R¼90 pm. (a) Experimentally computed energy /HS
(coloured dots) as a function of the optimization step j. The colour
represents the tangle (degree of entanglement) of the physical state,
estimated directly from the state parameters ffj
ig. The red lines indicate
the energy levels of H(R). The optimization algorithm clearly converges to
the ground state of the molecule, which has small but non-zero tangle. The
crosses show the energy calculated at each experimental step, assuming an
ideal quantum device. ( b) Overlap | /cj|cGSbetween the experimentally
computed state | cjSat each optimization step jand the theoretical ground
state of H,|cGS. Error bars are smaller than the data points. Further details
are provided in the Methods section, Supplementary Table 1 and
Supplementary Methods.50 100 150 200 250 300−2.9−2.8−2.7−2.6−2.5−2.4
Atomic separation R (pm)Energy (MJ mol−1)0 100 200 300 400−1001020
Atomic separation R (pm)Energy (MJ mol−1)
Theoretical 〈   〉
Experimental 〈   〉
Corrected Exp. 〈   〉
Figure 4 | Bond dissociation curve of the He–Hþmolecule. This curve
is obtained by repeated computation of the ground-state energy (as shown
in Fig. 3) for several H(R) values. The magniﬁed plot shows that after
correction for the measured systematic error the data overlap with the
theoretical energy curve, and, importantly, we can resolve the molecular
separation of minimal energy. Error bars show the standard deviation of the
computed energy, as described in the Methods section.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4213 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5
&2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
approximation to the ground state, but replaces a single long
coherent evolution by a number of shorter coherent calculations
proportional to the number of terms in the Hamiltonian. While
the effect of errors on each of these calculations is the same as inQPE, the reliance on a number of separate calculations makes the
algorithm sensitive to variations in state preparation between the
separate quantum calculations. This effect requires further
investigation. The most general local Hamiltonian problem is
QMA-complete35. However, under the reasonable assumption
that a good approximation to the state can be prepared, our
method and QPE can both efﬁciently estimate the energy of the
state, and it is in this setting that we compare them. In QVE, we
experimentally implemented a ground-state preparation
procedure through a direct variational algorithm on the control
parameters of the quantum hardware. The prepared state could
be utilized in either QEE 1 or QPE if desired. Larger calculations
will require a choice of ansatz, for which there are two
possibilities. One could experimentally implement chemically
motivated ansatz such as the unitary coupled cluster method.
Alternatively, one could pursue those ansa ¨tze that are most easy
to implement experimentally—creating a new set of device ansatz
states that would require classiﬁcation in terms of their overlap
with chemical ground states. Such a classiﬁcation would be a good
way to determine the value of a given experimental advance—for
ground-state problems it is best to focus limited experimental
resources on those efforts that will most enhance the overlap of
preparable states with chemical ground states. In addition to the
above issues, which we leave to future work, an interesting avenue
of research is to ask whether the conceptual approach described
here could be used to address other intractable problems with
quantum-enhanced computation. Examples that can be mapped
to the ground-state problem, and where the N-representability
problem does not occur, include search engine optimization and
image recognition. It should be noted that the approach presented
here requires no control or auxiliary qubits, relying only on
measurement techniques that are already well established. For
example, in the two-qubit case, these measurements are identicalto those performed in Bell inequality experiments.
Quantum simulators with only a few tens of qubits are
expected to outperform the capabilities of conventional compu-
ters, not including open questions regarding fault tolerance and
errors/precision. Our scheme would allow such devices to be
implemented using dramatically less resources than the current
best known approach.
Methods
Classical optimization algorithm .For the classical optimization step of our
integrated processor we implemented the Nelder–Mead (NM) algorithm36,a
simplex-based direct search (DS) method for unconstrained minimization of
objective functions. Although in general NM can fail because of the deterioration of
the simplex geometry or lack of sufﬁcient decrease, the convergence of this method
can be greatly improved by adopting a restarting strategy. Although other DSmethods, such as the gradient descent, can perform better for smooth functions,
these are not robust to the noise, which makes the objective function non-smooth
under experimental conditions. NM has the ability to explore neighbouring valleyswith better local optima, and likewise this exploring feature usually allows NM to
overcome non-smoothnesses. We veriﬁed that the gradient descent minimization
algorithm is not able to converge to the ground state of our Hamiltonian under the
experimental conditions, mainly due to the Poissonian noise associated with our
photon source and the accidental counts of the detection system, while NMconverged to the global minimum in most optimization runs.
Mapping from the state parameters to the chip phases
.The set of phases { yi},
which uniquely identiﬁes the state | cS, is not equivalent to the phases that are
written to the photonic circuit { fi}, since the chip phases are also used to imple-
ment the desired measurement operators sa#sb. Therefore, knowing the desired
state parameters and measurement operator we compute the appropriate values of
the chip phases on the CPU at each iteration of the optimization algorithm. The
algorithm for ﬁnding the state parameters { yi} for an arbitrary two-qubit state isdescribed in the Methods. These phases are then applied to the CNOT-MZ chip
using f1,2,3,4,7,8 . Here f7,8are modiﬁed to account for the choice of measurment
setting at the target qubit. (Any single-qubit projective measurement can be per-
formed using an MZI together with two phase shifters.) The measurement setting
for the control qubit is implemented using f5,6.
Estimation of the error on /HS.We performed measurements of the statistical
and systematic errors that affect our computation of /HS.
Statistical errors .Statistical errors due to the Poissonian noise associated with
single-photon statistics are intrinsic to the estimation of expectation values in
quantum mechanics.
These errors can be arbitrarily reduced at a sublinear cost of measurement time
(that is, efﬁciently) since the magnitude of error is proportional to the square root
of the count rate. We experimentally measured the standard deviation of an
expectation value /HiSfor a particular state using 50 trials. The total average
coincidence rate was B1,500 s/C01. The standard deviation was found to be 37 kJ
mol/C01, which is comparable to the error observed in the measurement of the
ground-state energy shown in Fig. 4.
The minima of the potential energy curve was determined by a generalized least
squares procedure to ﬁt a quadratic curve to the experimental data points in the
region R¼(80, 100) pm, as is common in the use of trust region searches for
minima37, using the inverse experimentally measured variances as weights.
Covariances determined by the generalized least squares procedure were used as
input to a Monte Carlo sampling procedure to determine the minimum energy andequilibrium bond distance as well as their uncertainties assuming Gaussian random
error. The uncertainties reported represent standard deviations. Sampling error in
the Monte Carlo procedure was 3 /C210/C04pm for the equilibrium bond distance
and 3 /C210/C08MJ mol/C01for the energy.
In Fig. 4, the large deviations from the theoretical line result from the
coincidental impact of noise resulting in premature optimization termination.These points could have been rerun or eliminated using the prior knowledge of
smoothness of the dissociation curve. However, to accurately portray the
performance of the algorithm exactly as described, with no expert interference,
these points are retained.
Systematic errors.In all the measurements described above we observed a con-
stant and reproducible small shift, E¼50 kJ mol/C01, of the expectation value with
respect to the theoretical value of the energy. There are at least three effects that
contribute to this systematic error.
Firstly, the downconversion source that we use in our experiment does not
produce the pure two-photon state that is required for high-ﬁdelity quantum
interference. In particular, higher-order photon number terms and, more
signiﬁcantly, photon distinguishability both degrade the performance of our
entangling gate and thus the preparation of the state | cS. This results in a shift of
the measured energy /c|H|cS. Higher-order terms could be effectively
eliminated by use of true single-photon sources (such as quantum dots or nitrogen
vacancy centers in diamond), and there is no fundamental limit to the degree of
indistinguishability that can be achieved through improved state engineering.
Secondly, imperfections in the implementation of the photonic circuit also
reduce the ﬁdelity with which | cSis prepared and measured. Small deviations
from designed beamsplitter reﬂectivities and interferometer path lengths, as well as
imperfections in the calibration of voltage-controlled phase shifters used to
manipulate the state, all contribute to this effect. However, these are technologicallimitations that can be greatly improved in future realizations.
Finally, unbalanced input and output coupling efﬁciency also results in skewed
two-photon statistics, again shifting the measured expectation value of /HS.
Another systematic effect that can be noted in Fig. 4 is that the magnitude of the
error on the experimental estimation of the ground-state energy increases with
R. This is due to the fact that as Rincreases the ﬁrst and second excited eigenstates
of this Hamiltonian become degenerate, resulting in increased difﬁculty for the
classical minimization, generating mixtures of states that increases the overallvariance of the estimation.
Quantum-state ﬁdelity
.In a previous work31, we measured the average state
ﬁdelity of states generated by the CNOT gate, estimated by quantum process
tomography, to be 0.873 ±0.001. The average quantum-state ﬁdelity over four Bell
states was 0.93. The average ﬁdelity across 995 conﬁgurations (equivalent to many
truth tables in many bases) was 0.990 ±0.009, with 96% of conﬁgurations
producing photon statistics with f40.97.
Count rate .In our experiment the mean count rate, which directly determines the
statistical error, was B2,000–4,000 twofold events per measurement. The expec-
tation value of a given Hamiltonian was reconstructed at each point from four two-qubit Pauli measurements. For the bond dissociation curve we measured about 100
points per optimization run. In the full dissociation curve we found the ground
states of 79 Hamiltonians. The full experiment was performed in about 158 h.ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213
6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4213 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
&2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
State preparation is relatively fast, requiring a few milliseconds to set the phases
on the chip. However, 17 s is required for cooling the chip, resulting in a duty cycle
ofB5%. The purpose of this is to overcome theinstability of the ﬁbre-to-chip
coupling due to thermal expansion of the chip during operation. This will not be an
issue in future implementations, where ﬁbres will be permanently ﬁxed to the
chip’s facets. Moreover, the thermal phase shifters used here will also likely be
replaced by alternative technologies based on the electro-optic effect.
Brighter single-photon sources will considerably reduce the measurement time.
References
1. Thogersen, L. & Olsen, J. A coupled cluster and full conﬁguration interaction
study of cn and cn-. Chem. Phys. Lett. 393, 36–43 (2004).
2. Helgaker, T., Jorgensen, P. & Olsen, J. Mol. Electronic Struct. Theory (Wiley,
Sussex, 2002).
3. Saad, Y. Numerical Methods for Large Eigenvalue Problems Vol. 158 (SIAM, 1992).
4. Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R. & Winograd, T. The Pagerank Citation Ranking:
Bringing Order to the Web . Technical Report 1999-66 (Stanford InfoLab, 1999).
5. Golub, G. H. & van der Vorst, H. A. Eigenvalue computation in the 20th
century. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 123, 35–65 (2000).
6. Nielsen, M. A. & Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information (Cambridge University Press, 2000).
7. Kitaev, A. Quantum measurements and the Abelian stabilizer problem.
Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC) 3(1996).
8. Grifﬁths, R. B. & Niu, C.-S. Semiclassical fourier transform for quantum
computation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,3228–3231 (1996).
9. Neven, H., Rose, G. & Macready, W. G. Image recognition with an adiabatic
quantum computer I. Mapping to quadratic unconstrained binary
optimization. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/0804.4457 (2008).
10. Harrow, A., Hassidim, A. & Lloyd, S. Quantum algorithm for linear systems of
equations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 150502 (2009).
11. Berry, D. W. High-order quantum algorithm for solving linear differential
equations. J. Phys. A 47,105301 (2014).
12. Garnerone, S., Zanardi, P. & Lidar, D. A. Adiabatic quantum algorithm for
search engine ranking. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 230506 (2012).
13. Abrams, D. S. & Lloyd, S. Simulation of many-body fermi systems on a
universal quantum computer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79,2586–2589 (1997).
14. Abrams, D. S. & Lloyd, S. Quantum algorithm providing exponential
speed increase for ﬁnding eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
5162–5165 (1999).
15. Aspuru-Guzik, A., Dutoi, A. D., Love, P. J. & Head-Gordon, M. Simulated
quantum computation of molecular energies. Science 309, 1704–1707 (2005).
16. Lanyon, B. P. et al. Towards quantum chemistry on a quantum computer. Nat.
Chem. 2,106–111 (2010).
17. Whitﬁeld, J. D., Biamonte, J. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Simulation of electronic structure
hamiltonians using quantum computers. Mol. Phys. 109, 735–750 (2011).
18. Aspuru-Guzik, A. & Walther, P. Photonic quantum simulators. Nat. Phys. 8,
285–291 (2012).
19. Jones, N. C. et al. Faster quantum chemistry simulation on fault-tolerant
quantum computers. New J. Phys. 14,115023 (2012).
20. Lloyd, S. Computational capacity of the universe. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88,237901
(2002).
21. Ma, X.-s., Dakic, B., Naylor, W., Zeilinger, A. & Walther, P. Quantum
simulation of the wavefunction to probe frustrated Heisenberg spin systems.Nat. Phys. 7,399–405 (2011).
22. Oseledets, I. Approximation of 2d/C22dmatrices using tensor decomposition.
SIAM J. Matrix Anal. A 31,2130–2145 (2010).
23. Ortiz, G., Gubernatis, J. E., Knill, E. & Laﬂamme, R. Quantum algorithms for
fermionic simulations. Phys. Rev. A 64,022319 (2001).
24. Liu, Y.-K., Christandl, M. & Verstraete, F. Quantum computational complexity
of the n-representability problem: Qma complete. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,110503
(2007).
25. Temme, K., Osborne, T. J., Vollbrecht, K. G., Poulin, D. & Verstraete, F.
Quantum Metropolis sampling. Nature 471, 87–90 (2011).
26. Yung, M.-H. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. A quantum-quantum Metropolis algorithm.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 754–759 (2012).27. Rayleigh, J. W. In ﬁnding the correction for the open end of an organ-pipe.
Phil. Trans. 161, 77 (1870).
28. Ritz, W. U ¨ber eine neue Methode zur Lo ¨sung gewisser variationsprobleme der
mathematischen physik. J. Reine Angew. Math. 135, 1–61 (1908).
29. Taube, A. G. & Bartlett, R. J. New perspectives on unitary coupled-cluster
theory. Int. J. Quant. Chem. 106, 3393–3401 (2006).
30. O’Brien, J. L., Furusawa, A. & Vuckovic, J. Photonic quantum technologies.
Nat. Photon. 3,687–695 (2009).
31. Shadbolt, P. et al. Generating, manipulating and measuring entanglement
and mixture with a reconﬁgurable photonic circuit. Nat. Photon. 6,45–49
(2011).
32. Crawford, T. D. et al. Psi3: an open-source ab initio electronic structure
package. J. Comp. Chem. 28,1610–1616 (2007).
33. Szarek, S. J. Volume of separable states is super-doubly-exponentially small in
the number of qubits. Phys. Rev. A 72,032304 (2005).
34. Zhou, X.-Q. et al. Adding control to arbitrary unknown quantum operations.
Nat. Commun. 2,413 (2011).
35. Kempe, J., Kitaev, A. & Regev, O. The complexity of the local hamiltonian
problem. SIAM J. Comput. 35,1070–1097 (2006).
36. Nelder, J. A. & Mead, R. A simplex method for function minimization. Comput.
J.7,308–313 (1965).
37. Conn, A. R., Gould, N. I. & Toint, P. L. Trust Region Methods Vol. 1 (Society for
Industrial Mathematics, 1987).
Acknowledgements
We thank Scott Aaronson, Robert Chapman, Seth Lloyd, Tim Ralph, Terry Rudolph,
Joe Fitzsimons and James Whitﬁeld for discussions. We acknowledge ﬁnancial support
from the UK EPSRC, ERC, QUANTIP, PHORBITECH, QESSENCE, Nokia, NSQI, the
Templeton Foundation and the EU DIQIP. A.P. acknowledges a Royal Academy ofEngineering Research Fellowship and a ARC Discovery Early Career Researcher Awardunder project number DE140101700. J.M. is supported by the DOE Computational
Science Graduate Fellowship under grant number DE-FG02-97ER25308. M.-H.Y.
acknowledges the support by the National Basic Research Program of China Grants2011CBA00300 and 2011CBA00301, the National Natural Science Foundation of ChinaGrants 61033001 and 61361136003, and the Youth 1000-talent program. P.J.L. is
supported by NSF award PHY-0955518 and by AFOSR award no. FA9550-12-1-0046.
A.A.-G. acknowledges support from the NSF CCI award no. CHE-1037992, the Air ForceOfﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research award no. FA9550-12-1-0046, the Camille and HenryDreyfus foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. J.L.O’B. acknowledges a RoyalSociety Wolfson Merit Award and a Royal Academy of Engineering Chair in Emerging
Technologies.
Author contributions
All authors contributed extensively to the work presented in this paper.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/
naturecommunications
Competing ﬁnancial interests: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
How to cite this article: Peruzzo, A. et al. A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic
quantum processor. Nat. Commun. 5:4213 doi: 10.1038/ncomms5213 (2014).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commonslicense, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included underthe Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the licenseholder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 5:4213 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5213 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7
&2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
