”Machine Learning” manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Emotion in Reinforcement Learning Agents and
Robots: A Survey.
Thomas M. Moerland · Joost Broekens ·
Catholijn M. Jonker
Received:date/Accepted:date
Abstract This article provides the first survey of computational models of emo-
tion in reinforcement learning (RL) agents. The survey focuses on agent/robot
emotions, and mostly ignores human user emotions. Emotions are recognized
as functional in decision-making by influencing motivation and action selection.
Therefore,computationalemotionmodelsareusuallygroundedintheagent’sdeci-
sionmakingarchitecture,ofwhichRLisanimportantsubclass.Studyingemotions
in RL-based agents is useful for three research fields. For machine learning (ML)
researchers, emotion models may improve learning efficiency. For the interactive
ML and human-robot interaction (HRI) community, emotions can communicate
state and enhance user investment. Lastly, it allows affective modelling (AM) re-
searchers to investigate their emotion theories in a successful AI agent class. This
surveyprovidesbackgroundonemotiontheoryandRL.Itsystematicallyaddresses
1)fromwhatunderlyingdimensions(e.g.,homeostasis,appraisal)emotionscanbe
derived and how these can be modelled in RL-agents, 2) what types of emotions
have been derived from these dimensions, and 3) how these emotions may either
influencethelearningefficiencyoftheagentorbeusefulassocialsignals.Wealso
systematicallycompareevaluationcriteria,anddrawconnectionstoimportantRL
sub-domainslike(intrinsic)motivationandmodel-basedRL.Inshort,thissurvey
provides both a practical overview for engineers wanting to implement emotions
in their RL agents, and identifies challenges and directions for future emotion-RL
research.
Keywords Reinforcement learning · Emotion · Motivation · Agent · Robot
1 Introduction
This survey systematically covers the literature on computational models of emo-
tioninreinforcementlearning(RL)agents.Computationalmodelsofemotionsare
T.M.Moerland,J.Broekens,C.M.Jonker
DelftUniversityofTechnology
Mekelweg4,2628CD,Delft,TheNetherlands
E-mail:{T.M.Moerland,D.J.Broekens,C.M.Jonker}@tudelft.nl
7102
yaM
51
]GL.sc[
1v27150.5071:viXra
2 Moerlandetal.
usuallygroundedintheagentdecision-makingarchitecture.Inthisworkwefocus
on emotion models in a successful learning architecture: reinforcement learning,
i.e. agents optimizing some reward function in a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
formulation.Todirectlyavoidconfusion:thetopicdoesnotimplytheagentshould
‘learnitsemotions’,i.e.emotionsareratherhookedoncharacteristicsoftheMDP
(likevalueandtransitionfunctions),andmayforexamplewellpersistafterlearn-
ing has converged.
One may question why it is useful to study emotions in machines at all. The
computationalstudyofemotionsisanexampleofbio-inspirationincomputational
science.Manyimportantadvancementsinmachinelearningandoptimizationwere
based on biological principles, such as neural networks, evolutionary algorithms
and swarm-based optimization (Russell et al, 1995). An example encountered in
this survey is homeostasis, a concept closely related to emotions, and a biological
principle that led researchers to implement goal switching in RL agents.
The study of emotions in learning agents is useful for three research fields.
First, for the machine learning (ML) community, emotions may benefit learning
efficiency. For example, there are important connections to the work on (intrinsi-
cally) motivated RL. Second, researchers working on interactive machine learning
and human-robot interaction (HRI) may benefit from emotions to enhance both
transparency (i.e. communicate agent internal state) and user empathy. Finally,
from an affective modelling (AM) perspective, where emotions are mostly studied
in cognitive agents, RL agents provide the general benefits of the MDP formula-
tion: these agents require few assumptions, can be applied to a variety of tasks
without much prior knowledge, and, allow for learning. This also gives AM re-
searchers access to complex, high-dimensional test domains to evaluate emotion
theories.
Emotion is an important part of human intelligence (Johnson-Laird and Oat-
ley, 1992; Damasio, 1994; Baumeister et al, 2007). On the one hand, emotion
has been defined as a response to a significant stimulus - characterized by brain
and body arousal and a subjective feeling - that elicits a tendency towards moti-
vated action (Calvo et al, 2014; Frijda et al, 1989). This emphasizes the relation
of emotions with motivation and action. On the other hand, emotions have also
been identified as complex feedback signals used to shape behaviour (Baumeister
et al, 2007; Broekens et al, 2013). This view emphasizes the feedback function of
emotion. The common ground in both: 1) emotions are related to action selection
mechanisms and 2) emotion processing is in principle beneficial to the viability
of the individual. As an illustration, Damasio (1994) showed that people with
impaired emotional processing (due to brain damage) show failures in work and
social life. These observations connecting emotions to action selection and adap-
tive decision-making sparked interest in the computer science community as well,
mainly following the initial work by Can˜amero (1997b) and Gadanho and Hallam
(1998).
We wrote this survey for two reasons. First, while the topic of emotion in RL
agents has received attention for nearly 20 years, it appears to fall in between
the machine learning and affective modelling communities. In particular, there is
no framework connecting the variety of models and implementations. Although
Rumbell et al (2012) compared emotion models in twelve different agents, their
work does not provide a full survey of the topic, nor does it focus on agents
with a learning architecture. Our main aim is to establish such a framework,
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 3
hoping to bridge the communities and potentially align research agendas. As a
second motivation, this survey is also useful to engineers working on social agents
and robots. Emotion has an important functional role in social interaction and
social robotics (Fong et al, 2003). Our survey is also a practical guideline for
engineerswhowishtoimplementemotionalfunctionalityintheirRL-basedagents
and robots.
Asafinalnote,theterm‘reinforcementlearning’maybemisleadingtoreaders
from a cognitive AI or psychological background. RL may reminisce of ‘instru-
mental conditioning’, with stimulus-response experiments on short time-scales.
Althoughindeedrelated,RLherereferstothecomputationaltermforasuccessful
class of algorithms solving Markov Decision Processes by sampling and learning
from data. MDPs (introduced in Section 2.4) provide a generic specification for
short-term and long-term sequential decision-making problems with minimal as-
sumptions.NotethatmanycognitiveAIapproaches,thatusuallyemployanotion
of ‘goal’, are also expressible in MDP formulation by defining a sparse reward
function with positive reward at the goal state.
Thestructureofthisreviewisasfollows.First,Section2providesthenecessary
backgroundonemotionandreinforcementlearningfrompsychology,neuroscience
andcomputerscience.Section3discussesthesurvey’smethodologyandproposed
taxonomy. Subsequently, Sections 4-6 contain the main results of this survey by
systematically categorizing approaches to emotion elicitation, emotion types and
emotion functionality. Additionally, the comparison of evaluation criteria is pre-
sented in (Section 7). The survey ends with a general discussion of our findings,
highlights some important problems and indicates future directions in this field
(Section 8).
2 Background
As many papers included in this survey build upon psychological (2.1) and neu-
roscientific (2.2) theories of emotion, this section provides a high-level overview
of these fields. Subsequently, we position our work in the computer science and
machine learning community (2.3). We conclude these preliminaries by formally
introducing computational reinforcement learning (2.4).
2.1 Psychology
We discuss three dominant psychological emotion theories: categorical, dimen-
sional, and componential theories (see also Lisetti and Hudlicka (2014)).
Categoricalemotiontheoryassumesthereisasetofdiscreteemotionsforming
the ‘basic’ emotions. These ideas are frequently inspired by the work by Ekman
et al (1987), who identified the cross-cultural recognition of anger, fear, joy, sad-
ness, surprise and disgust on facial expressions. In an evolutionary perspective,
each basic emotion can be considered as an elementary response pattern, or ac-
tion tendency (Frijda et al, 1989). For example, fear has the associated action
tendencyofavoidance,whichhelpstheorganismtosurviveadangeroussituation,
accompaniedbyanegativefeelingandprototypicalfacialexpression.However,the
conceptof‘basic’emotionsremainscontroversialwithinpsychology,asisreflected
4 Moerlandetal.
in the ongoing debate about which emotions should be included. The number of
emotions to be included ranges from 2 to 18, see Calvo et al (2014).
Dimensional emotion theory (Russell, 1978) assumes an underlying affective
space. This space involves at least two dimensions; usually valence (i.e. posi-
tive/negative evaluation) and arousal (i.e. activation level) (Russell and Barrett,
1999). For example, fear is a highly arousing and negative affective state. The
theory was originally developed as a ‘Core affect’ model, i.e. describing a more
long-term, underlying emotional state. Osgood et al (1964) orginally added dom-
inance as a third dimension, resulting in the PAD (pleasure, arousal, dominance)
model. Dimensional models have difficulty separating emotion categories such as
anger and disgust, which is a common critique on the theory.
Finally, componential emotion theory, best known as cognitive appraisal the-
ory(Lazarus,1991),considersemotionsastheresultsofevaluations(appraisals)of
incomingstimuliaccordingtopersonalrelevance.Someexamplesoffrequentlyoc-
curring appraisal dimensions are valence, novelty, goal relevance, goal congruence
and coping potential. Distinct emotions relate to specific patterns of appraisal
activation. For example, anger is a result of evaluating a situation as harmful
to one’s own goals with the emotion attributed to the responsible actor and at
least some feeling of power. Some well-known appraisal theories that have been
a basis for computational models are the OCC model (named after the authors
Ortony, Clore and Collins) (Ortony et al, 1990), the component process theory
of emotions (CPT) (Scherer et al, 2001), and the belief-desire theory of emotions
(BDTE) (Reisenzein, 2009). Although cognitive appraisal theories describe the
structure of emotion well, they are limited with respect to explaining where ap-
praisals themselves come from, what the function of emotion is in cognition and
intelligence, and how they are related to evolution.
Note that the presented theories focus on different aspects of emotions. For
example, appraisal theory focuses on how emotions are elicited, while categorical
emotion models focus on action tendencies, i.e. the immediate function of emo-
tions. Some consider emotions to precede action selection, while others focus on
emotionsasfeedbacksignals(Baumeisteretal,2007).Inthissurveyemotionsare
considered in a reward-based feedback loop, which involves both emotion elicita-
tion and function.
2.2 Neuroscience
Affectiveresponsesandtheirrelationtobehaviourandlearninghavealsobeenex-
tensively studied in neuroscience; for a survey see (Rolls and Grabenhorst, 2008).
We discuss theories by LeDoux, Damasio and Rolls. The work by LeDoux (2003)
mainly focussed on the role of the amygdala in fear conditioning. LeDoux iden-
tified that incoming sensory stimuli can directly move from thalamus to amyg-
dala, thereby bypassing the previously assumed intermediate step through the
neo-cortex.Assuch,theworkshowedthatemotionalresponsesmayalsobeelicited
without neo-cortical reasoning.
Damasio (1994) took a different perspective on rational emotions through the
‘somatic marker hypothesis’. He proposes that emotions are the result of bodily
sensations,whichtelltheorganismthatcurrentsensations(i.e.events)arebenefi-
cial(e.g.pleasure)orharmful(e.g.pain).Thesomaticmarkeristhereforeasignal
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 5
thatcanbeinterpretedasfeedbackaboutthedesirabilityofcurrentandimagined
situations.ThesomaticmarkerhypothesishasbeeninterpretedintermsofRLas
well (Dunn et al, 2006).
Later work by Rolls shifted the attention from the amygdala to the orbito-
frontal cortex (OFC) (Rolls and Grabenhorst, 2008) Imaging studies have impli-
cated the OFC in both reinforcement and affect, with direct input connections
of most sensory channels (taste, olfactory, visual, touch), while projecting to sev-
eral brain areas involving motor behaviour (striatum) and autonomic responses
(hypothalamus) (Rolls and Grabenhorst, 2008). Also, single neuron studies have
shown that visual and taste signals (the latter being a well-known primary rein-
forcer)convergeonthesameneurons(RollsandBaylis,1994),coined’conditional
reward neurons’. Earlier work already identified ’error neurons’, which mainly re-
spond when an expected reward is not received (Thorpe et al, 1983).
Together,thesetheoriessuggestthatemotionsarecloselylinkedtorewardpro-
cessing. These ideas are implicitly reflected in part of the reinforcement learning-
basedimplementationsinthissurvey.TheseideasarealsoreflectedinRolls’evolu-
tionarytheoryofemotion(RollsandGrabenhorst,2008),whichidentifiesemotions
astheresultsofprimaryreinforcers(liketaste,affiliativetouch,pain)whichspec-
ify generic goals for survival and reproductive success (like food, company and
body integrity). According to Rolls, emotions exclusively emerge from these goal-
relatedevents.Thisviewisalsocompatiblewiththecognitiveappraisalviewthat
emotionsaretheresultofstimulibeingevaluatedaccordingtotheirgoal/needrel-
evance. However, in cognitive appraisal theory the ’goal’ is defined at a different
level of abstraction.
2.3 Computer Science
Affective modelling is a vibrant field in computer science with active subfields
(Calvoetal,2014),includingworkonaffectdetectionandsocialsignalprocessing
(Vinciarelli et al, 2012; Calvo and D’Mello, 2010), computational modelling of
affectinrobotsandvirtualagents(Marsellaetal,2010),andexpressionofemotion
in robots and virtual agents (Ochs et al, 2015; Paiva et al, 2015; Lhommet and
Marsella, 2015). Since this survey focusses on affective modelling, in particular
in RL-based agents, we provide some context by discussing emotions in different
agent architectures, in particular symbolic and (non-RL) machine learning-based.
One of the earliest symbolic/cognitive architectures was Velasquez’ Cathexis
model (Velasquez, 1998). It incorporated Ekman’s six emotions in the pet robot
Yuppy, which later also formed the basis for the well-known social robot Kismet
(Breazeal,2003).Severalwell-knownsymbolicarchitectureshavealsoincorporated
emotions, either based on categorical emotions (Murphy et al, 2002), somatic
marker hypothesis (Laird, 2008), or appraisal theories (EMIB (Michaud, 2002),
EMA (Marsella and Gratch, 2009) and LIDA (Franklin et al, 2014)). Although
symbolic/cognitive architecture approaches are capable of solving a variety of AI
tasks, they are limited with respect to learning from exploration and feedback in
unstructured tasks.
In contrast, machine learning implementations focus on learning, as the agent
shouldgraduallyadapttoitsenvironmentandtask.Thedominantresearchdirec-
tioninthisfieldisreinforcementlearning(RL)(SuttonandBarto,1998),whichwe
6 Moerlandetal.
formally introduce in the next section. There are however other machine learning
implementations that incorporate emotions. Some examples include agents based
onevolutionaryneuralnetworks(ParisiandPetrosino,2010),thefree-energyprin-
ciple (Joffily and Coricelli, 2013), Bayesian models (Antos and Pfeffer, 2011) or
entropy (Belavkin, 2004).
Finally, we want to stress that the focus of this review is on agent emotion,
i.e. how it is elicited and may influence the agent’s learning loop. A related but
clearly distinct topic is how human emotion may act as a teaching signal for this
loop.Broekens(2007)showedhumanemotionalfeedbackspeedsupagentlearning
inagrid-worldtaskcomparedtoabaselineagent.Thereareafewotherexamples
in this direction (Hasson et al, 2011; Moussa and Magnenat-Thalmann, 2013),
but in general the literature of emotion as a teaching signal is limited. Although
the way in which humans actually tend to provide feedback is an active research
topic (Thomaz and Breazeal, 2008; Knox et al, 2012, 2013), it remains a question
whetheremotionswouldbeaviablechannelforhumanfeedback.Wedonotfurther
pursue this discussion here, and put our focus on agent emotions in RL agents.
2.4 Computational Reinforcement Learning
Computational reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 1998; Wiering
and Van Otterlo, 2012) is a successful approach that enables autonomous agents
to learn from interaction with their environment. We adopt a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) specified by the tuple: {S,A,T,r,γ}, where S denotes a set of
states, A a set of actions, T : S ×A → P(S) denotes the transition function,
r :S×A×S →R denotes the reward function and γ ∈(0,1] denotes a discount
parameter. The goal of the agent is to find a policy π :S →P(A) that maximizes
the expected (infinite-horizon) discounted return:
Qπ(s,a)=E
(cid:110)(cid:88) ∞
γtr(s ,a ,s )|s =s,a =a
(cid:111)
π,T t t t+1 0 0
t=0
= (cid:88) T(s(cid:48)|s,a) (cid:104) r(s,a,s(cid:48))+γ (cid:88) π(s(cid:48),a(cid:48))Qπ(s(cid:48),a(cid:48)) (cid:105) (1)
s(cid:48)∈S a(cid:48)∈A
whereweexplicitlywriteouttheexpectationoverthe(possibly)stochasticpolicy
and transition function. The optimal value function is defined as
Q(cid:63)(s,a)=maxQπ(s,a) (2)
π
from which we can derive the optimal policy
π(cid:63)(s)=argmaxQ(cid:63)(s,a) (3)
a∈A
There are several approaches to learning the optimal policy. When the envi-
ronmental dynamics T(s(cid:48)|s,a) and reward function r(s,a,s(cid:48)) are known, we can
use planning algorithms like Dynamic Programming (DP). However, in many ap-
plications the environment’s dynamics are hard to determine. As an alternative,
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 7
we can use sampling-based methods to learn the policy, known as reinforcement
learning.
ThereisalargevarietyofRLapproaches.First,wecanseparatevalue-function
methods, which try to iteratively approximate the cumulative return specified in
equation(1),andpolicysearch,whichtriestodirectlyoptimizesomeparametrized
policy. Policy search shows promising results in real robotic applications (Kober
and Peters, 2012). However, most work in RL utilizes value-function methods, on
which we also focus in this survey.
Among value-function methods we should identify model-free versus model-
basedapproaches.Inmodel-freeRLweiterativelyapproximatethevalue-function
through temporal difference (TD) learning, thereby avoiding having to learn the
transition function (which is usually challenging). Well-known algorithms are Q-
learning (Watkins, 1989), SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan, 1994) and TD(λ)
(Sutton, 1988). The update equation for Q-learning is given by:
(cid:104) (cid:105)
Q(s,a)=Q(s,a)+α r(s,a,s(cid:48))+γmaxQ(s(cid:48),a(cid:48))−Q(s,a) (4)
a(cid:48)
where α specifies a learning rate. With additional criteria for the learning and
exploration parameters we can show this estimation procedure converges to the
optimal value function (Sutton and Barto, 1998).
Model-based RL (Hester and Stone, 2012b) is a hybrid form of planning (like
DP) and sampling (like TD learning). In model-based RL, we approximate the
transitionandrewardfunctionfromthesampledexperience.Afteracquiringknowl-
edgeoftheenvironment,wecanmixrealsampleexperiencewithplanningupdates.
WewillwriteM ={Tˆ,rˆ}todenotetheestimatedmodel.Notethatamodelisde-
rived from the full agent-environment interaction history at time-point t, as given
by g ={s ,a ,s ,a ,s ,...s ,a ,s }.
t 0 0 1 1 2 t−1 t−1 t
A final aspect we have not yet discussed is the nature of the reward func-
tion.TraditionalRLspecificationsassumeanexternalrewardsignal(knownasan
‘external Critic’). However, as argued by Chentanez et al (2004), in animals the
reward signal is by definition derived from neuronal activations, and the Critic
therefore resides inside the organism. It therefore also incorporates information
from the internal environment, making all reward ‘internal’. Singh et al (2010)
identifiestwotypesofinternalreward:extrinsicinternalandintrinsicinternal(we
will omit ‘internal’ and simply use extrinsic and intrinsic from now on). Extrin-
sic reward is related to resources/stimuli/goals in the external world (e.g. food),
possibly influenced by internal variables (e.g. sugar level). In RL terms, extrin-
sic reward explicitly depends on the content of the sensory information (i.e. the
observed state). On the contrary, intrinsic reward is not dependent on external
resources, but rather derived from the agent-environment history g and current
model M. An example of intrinsic reward in animals is curiosity. Intrinsic reward
is domain-independent, i.e. curiosity is not related to any external resource, but
canhappenatanystate(dependentontheagenthistoryg).Incontrast,extrinsic
reward for food will never occur in domains where food does not occur. Intrinsic
motivation has been identified to serve a developmental role to organisms.
8 Moerlandetal.
3 Survey structure and methodology
We intended to include all research papers in which reinforcement learning and
emotion play a role. We conducted a systematic Google Scholar search for ’Emo-
tion’ AND ’Reinforcement Learning’ AND ’Computational’, and for ’Emotion’
AND’MarkovDecisionProcess’.Wescannedallabstractsforthejointoccurrence
ofemotionandlearningintheproposedwork.Whenindoubt,weassessedthefull
article to determine inclusion. Moreover, we investigated all papers citing several
core papers in the field, for example, Gadanho and Hallam (2001), Salichs and
Malfaz (2012), Broekens et al (2007a) and Marinier and Laird (2008). This re-
sulted in 52 papers included in this survey. A systematic overview of these papers
can be found in Table 9 and 10.
The proposed taxonomy of emotion elicitation, type and function is shown in
Table 1, also stating the associated subsection where each category is discussed.
The elicitation and function categories are also visually illustrated in Figure 1, a
figure that is based on the motivated RL illustration (with internal Critic) intro-
duced in Chentanez et al (2004). Figure 1 may be useful to refer back to during
readingtointegratethedifferentideas.Finally,foreachindividualpaperthereader
canverifytheassociatedcategoryofemotionelicitation,typeandfunctionthrough
the colour coding in the overview Table 9.
There is one important assumption throughout this work, which we want to
emphasize here. We already introduced the distinction between extrinsic and in-
trinsic motivation in RL at the end of the last section. Throughout this work, we
parallel extrinsic motivation with homeostasis (Section 4.1), and intrinsic moti-
vation with appraisal (Section 4.2). The extrinsic/intrinsic distinction is clearly
partoftheRLliterature,whilehomeostasisandespeciallyappraisalbelongtothe
affectivemodellingliterature.Wegroupthesetogether,astheconceptofextrinsic
motivation is frequently studied in combination with homeostasis, while intrinsic
motivation shows large overlap with appraisal theory. We will identify this over-
lap in the particular sections. However, the point we want to stress is that the
concepts are not synonyms. For example, it is not clear whether some intrinsic
motivation or appraisal dimensions also show homeostatic dynamics (a point at
which we tend to disagree with Singh et al (2010)). However, a full discussion of
the overlap and difference moves towards psychology, and is beyond the scope of
our computational overview. We merely identify the overlap we observed in com-
putationalimplementations,andthereforediscussbothextrinsic/homeostasisand
intrinsic/appraisal as single sections.
Table 1 Overview of categories in emotion elicitation, emotion type and emotion function.
Thenumberbeforeeachcategoryidentifiestheparagraphwherethetopicisdiscussed.Emotion
elicitationandfunctionarealsovisuallyillustratedinFigure1.
Emotion elicitation Emotion type Emotion function
4.1Homeostasisand 5.1Categorical 6.1Rewardmodification
extrinsicmotivation 5.2Dimensional 6.2Statemodification
4.2 Appraisal and intrinsic 6.3Meta-learning
motivation 6.4Actionselection
4.3Value/reward-based 6.5Epiphenomenon
4.4Hard-wired
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 9
Fig.1 SchematicrepresentationofmotivatedreinforcementlearningbasedonChentanezetal
(2004).AlthoughtraditionalRLassumesanexternalCritic(toprovidetherewardsignal),this
actuallyhappensinsidethebrainofreal-worldorganisms.TherebytheCriticalsoincorporates,
apartfromexternalsensations,internalmotivationstodeterminethecurrentrewardandstate.
Motivationshavebeenderivedfromhomeostaticvariablesand/orinternalmodels.TheCritic
then feeds the state and reward to the Agent. The Agent usually learns a value function
(Adaptive Critic) and determines the next action (Actor). Note that ordinary RL, in which
the reward is a fully external stimulus, is still a specific case of this scheme (with the Critic
asidentityfunction).Emotionelicitation(green)hasbeenassociatedtoA)Homeostasisand
extrinsicmotivation(paragraph4.1),B)Appraisalandintrinsicmotivation(4.2),C)Reward
andvaluefunction(4.3)andD)Hard-wiredconnectionsfromsensations(4.4).Subsequently,
the elicited emotion may also influence the learning loop. Emotion function (blue) has been
linked to I) Reward modification (6.1), II) State modification (6.2), III) Meta-learning (6.3),
IV)Actionselection(6.4)andfinallyasV)Epiphenomenon(6.5).
4 Emotion elicitation
We identify four major categories of emotion elicitation: extrinsic/homeostatic
(4.1), intrinsic/appraisal (4.2), value function and reward-based (4.3), and finally
hard-wired (4.4).
10 Moerlandetal.
4.1 Homeostasis and extrinsic motivation
Severalcomputationalimplementationsofemotionsinvolvehomeostaticvariables,
drives and motivations. The notion of internal drives originates from the Drive
Reduction Theory developed by Hull (1943), which identifies drive reduction as a
centralcauseoflearning.Theseinnatedrivesarealsoknownasprimaryreinforcers,
astheirrewardingnatureishard-wiredinoursystem(duetoevolutionarybenefit).
An example ofa homeostatic variable isenergy/sugar level,which hasa temporal
dynamic, an associated drive when in deficit (hunger) and can be satiated by an
external influence (food intake). The reader might now question why machines
even need something like ‘hunger’. However, for a robot the current energy level
showssimilaritytohumansugarlevels(andbodyintegrityandpainshowsimilarity
to a robot’s mechanical integrity, etc.). Thereby, homeostasis is a useful concept
to study in machines as well (see also the remark about bio-inspiration in the
Introduction). There is a vast literature on motivated reinforcement learning, see
e.g. Konidaris and Barto (2006) and Cos et al (2013), mainly for its potential to
naturally switch between goals. Early implementations of these ideas outside the
reinforcement learning framework were by Can˜amero (1997a,b).
We denote a homeostatic variable by h , where t identifies the dependency
t
of this variable on time. The organism’s full physiological state is captured by
H = {h ,h ..h }, where h indicates the ith homeostatic variable. Each
t 1,t 2,t N,t i,t
homeostatic variable has a certain set point H(cid:63) = {h(cid:63),h(cid:63)..h(cid:63) } (Keramati and
1 2 N
Gutkin, 2011). Furthermore, each homeostatic variable is affected by a set of ex-
ternal resources, associated to a particular action or state. For example, a partic-
ular homeostatic variable may increase upon resource consumption, and slightly
decrease with every other action (Konidaris and Barto, 2006). More formally, de-
noting resource consumption by a¯ and the presence of a resource by s¯, a simple
homeostatic dynamic would be
(cid:40)
h +ψ(s ,a ) if a ∈a¯,s ∈s¯
i,t t t t t
h = (5)
i,t+1
h −(cid:15) otherwise
i,t
for a resource effect of size ψ(s ,a ). We can also explicitly identify a drive as the
t t
difference between the current value and setpoint, i.e. d =|h(cid:63)−h | (Cos et al,
i,t i i,t
2013). The overall drive of the system can then be specified by
N N
D = (cid:88) θ d = (cid:88) θ |h(cid:63)−h | (6)
t i i,t i i i,t
i=1 i=1
whereweintroducedθ tospecifytheweightorimportanceofthei-thhomeostatic
i
variable. Most examples take the absolute difference between current value and
setpoint (i.e. the L norm) as shown above. However, we can consider the space
1
of homeostatic variables H ∈RN and in principle define any distance function in
thisspacewithrespecttothereferencepointH(cid:63) (seee.g.Figure2foraEuclidean
distance example).
Theweightofeachhomeostaticvariable(θ )doesnotneedtobefixedintime.
i
For example, Konidaris makes it a non-linear function of the current homeostatic
level h and a priority parameter ρ : θ =f(h ,ρ ). The former dependence
i,t i,t i,t i,t i,t
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 11
Fig. 2 Schematicillustrationofhomeostasisanddrives.Thefigureshowsatwo-dimensional
homeostatic space consisting (as an example) of energy (h1) and water level (h2). The set
point(H(cid:63))indicatesthedesiredvaluesforthehomeostaticvariables.Atthecurrenttimepoint
t the agent’s homeostatic status is Ht (red). The associated drive Dt can be visualize as the
distancetothesetpoint.NotethatweusetheEuclideandistanceforthedrivehere(i.e.Dt=
||H(cid:63)−Ht||2),whilethetextdescribestheL1-normexample(i.e.Dt=||H(cid:63)−Ht||1,equation
6). We are free to choose any distance metric in homeostatic space. After taking an action
the new homeostatic status becomes Ht+1 (green), in this case bringing both homeostatic
levelsclosertotheirsetpoint.Thedifferencebetweenthedrivesatbothtimepointshasbeen
associatedtorewardandjoy(seeSection6.1).FigurepartiallybasedonKeramatiandGutkin
(2011).
allowspriorities(i.e.rewards)toscalenon-linearlywiththesensoryinputlevels(an
ideareminiscentofProspectTheory(KahnemanandTversky,1979)).Thepriority
parameters ρ can be estimated online, for example assigning more importance
i,t
to resources which are harder to obtain (i.e. that should get priority earlier). As a
finalnoteonhomeostaticRLsystems,notethatinternalvariablesneedtobepart
of the state-space as well. One can either include all homeostatic variables and
learngenericQ-values,orincludeonlythedominantdriveandlearndrive-specific
Q-values (Konidaris and Barto, 2006).
Theconnectionbetweendrives/homeostasisandemotionsispartiallyreflected
in Damasio’s somatic marker hypothesis (Damasio, 1994), stating that emotions
are the result of bodily sensations. In general, we identify two ways in which
homeostaticsystemshavebeenusedtoelicitemotions.Thefirstelicitscategorical
emotionsfromasubsetofhomeostaticvariables,whilethesecondderivesanoverall
well-being W from the sum of the homeostatic dimensions.
OneofthefirstRLsystemsderivingemotionsfromhomeostasiswasbyGadanho
and Hallam (1998, 2001). They describe an extensive set of internal variables
(drives), including e.g. hunger (rises per timestep in lack of resources), pain (rises
withcollisions),restlessness(riseswithnon-progress)andtemperature(riseswith
highmotorusage).Emotionsarerelatedtothesephysiologicalvariables,e.g.hap-
piness is derived from the frequent motor use or decreasing hunger, sadness from
lowenergy,fearfromcollisions(withlesssensitivityiftheagentishungryorrest-
less),andangerfromhighrestlessness.SimilarideasareputforwardbyCoutinho
et al (2005), who specifies a more biological homeostasis: blood sugar (increases
with food intake), endorphine (increases with play), energy (increases with bed
rest),vascularvolume(increaseswithwaterintake)andbodyintegrity(decreases
12 Moerlandetal.
Table 2 Overview of most frequently investigated homeostatic dimensions, their associated
driveincaseofdeficit,andthepapersinwhichexampleimplementationscanbefound.
Homeostasic variable Drive Papers
Food/energy Hunger (Gadanho and Hallam, 2001), (Salichs and
Malfaz, 2012), (Coutinho et al, 2005)
(Von Haugwitz et al, 2012) (Goerke, 2006)
(Tanakaetal,2004)
Waterlevel Thirst (Salichs and Malfaz, 2012) (Coutinho et al,
2005)
Bodyintegrity Pain (Gadanho and Hallam, 2001) (Coutinho
et al, 2005) (Tanaka et al, 2004) (Lee-
Johnsonetal,2010)
Activity Restlessness (Gadanho and Hallam, 2001) (Coutinho
etal,2005)(VonHaugwitzetal,2012)
Energy(movement) Sleep/tiredness (Salichs and Malfaz, 2012) (Coutinho et al,
2005) (Von Haugwitz et al, 2012) (Goerke,
2006)(Tanakaetal,2004)
Socialinteraction Loneliness (SalichsandMalfaz,2012)
with obstacle collision). Similar examples of homeostatic emotions can be found
in Von Haugwitz et al (2012), Tanaka et al (2004) and Goerke (2006).
Asecondgroupofimplementationsfirstdefinestheoverallwell-being(W).An
example of a well-being specification is
N
W =K−D =K− (cid:88) θ |h(cid:63)−h | (7)
t t i i i,t
i=1
where K denotes a reference value. Compared to the previous paragraph, now all
internal variables (instead of subsets) are combined into a single emotion. Some
papers leave the specification of well-being as their emotion (Gadanho, 2003).
Others actually identify the positive or negative difference in well-being as happy
and unhappy (Salichs and Malfaz, 2012) or ‘hedonic value’ (Cos et al, 2013).
In conclusion, there have been numerous approaches to homeostatic systems
in emotional implementations. A summary of some of the most frequently en-
countered homeostatic dimensions is shown in Table 2. Although most papers
use slightly different specifications for their homeostatic dimensions, it is usually
a matter of labelling that does not affect the underlying principle. Homeostatic
variablesprovideagoodwaytonaturallyimplementgoalandtaskswitching.The
implementation of this functionality usually involves reward modification, which
is covered in Section 6.1.
4.2 Appraisal and intrinsic motivation
Appraisal theory is an influential psychological emotion theory (see Section 2).
Appraisals are domain independent elements that provide (affective) meaning to
aparticularstimulus.Assuch,theyareabasisforemotionelicitation,asdifferent
combinationsofappraisaldimensionshavedifferentassociatedemotions.Examples
of appraisal dimensions are novelty, recency, control and motivational relevance.
These terms of course refer to abstract cognitive concepts, but in RL literature
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 13
theyshowalargeoverlapwithintrinsicmotivationfeatures,beingindependentof
a specific external resource. Instead, they are functions of the agent-environment
interaction history g and derived model M:
ζ (s,a,s(cid:48))=f (g,M) (8)
j j
for the jth appraisal variable. Note that the current state and action are actually
includeding,butweemphasizethatf (·)isnotafunctionoftheactualcontentof
j
any state s (see Section 2.4 for a discussion of the extrinsic/intrinsic distinction).
Rather, f (·) computes domain-independent characteristics, like ‘recency’ which
j
may be derived from g, and ‘motivational relevance’ which can be derived by
planning over M.
Intrinsicmotivationisanactivetopicindevelopmentalrobotics(Oudeyerand
Kaplan, 2007). Singh et al (2010) shows how incorporating these dimensions as
extra reward provides better task achievement compared to non-intrinsically mo-
tivated agents (see Section 6.1). We discuss two implementations based on these
ideas more extensively: Marinier and Laird (2008) and Sequeira et al (2011). The
work by Marinier and Laird (2008) takes a diverse set of appraisal dimensions
based on Scherer’s appraisal theory (Scherer, 1999). These include both sensory
processing dimensions, like suddenness, intrinsic pleasantness and relevance, and
comprehension and reasoning dimensions, like outcome probability, discrepancy
from expectation, conduciveness, control and power. The implementation by Se-
queiraetal(2011)usesasmallersubsetofappraisaldimensions:novelty,relevance,
valence and control. Note that these appraisal-based papers only elicit appraisal
dimensions, without specifying categorical or dimensional emotions on top (see
Table 9, i.e. appraisal papers with empty middle column).
We now highlight some appraisal implementations, both to concretize their
specification in MDPs, and illustrate the differences between models. Sequeira
et al (2011) specifies ‘motivational relevance’ as inversely related to the distance
tothegoal.IfweimplementaplanningprocedureoverourmodelM whichreturns
anestimateddistancedˆ(s,s◦)tothegoalnodes◦fromourcurrentnodes,thenthe
associated appraisal variable for motivational relevance could be (Sequeira et al,
2011):
1
ζ (s)= (9)
relevance 1+dˆ(s,s◦)
Similarly, if we denote by c(s) the number of time-steps since node s was last
visited, then we can specify a ‘recency’ feature as (Bratman et al, 2012):
1
ζ (s)=1− (10)
recency
c(s)
This example intrinsic motivation vector ζ ={ζ ,ζ } is used in Sec-
relevance recency
tion 6.1 to show its use in reward modification.
ThereareseveralmorespecificationsinintrinsicmotivationRLliteraturethat
reflect appraisal dimensions. For example, Hester and Stone (2012a) maintain an
ensemble of transition models (by stochastically adding new data to each model)
and derive ‘model uncertainty’ from the KL-divergence (as a measure of the dis-
tance between two probability distributions) between the ensemble model’s pre-
dictions:
14 Moerlandetal.
ζ (s,a)= (cid:88) D (cid:104) T (s(cid:48)|s,a)(cid:107)T (s(cid:48)|s,a) (cid:105) (11)
uncertainty KL i j
i(cid:54)=j
for all pairs of models i and j in the ensemble. As a second example from their
paper, ‘novelty’ of a state-action pair is identified from the closest L -distance to
1
a historical observation:
ζ (s,a)= min (cid:107)(cid:104)s,a(cid:105)−(cid:104)s ,a (cid:105)(cid:107) (12)
novelty i i 1
<si,ai>∈g
Recently,Houthooftetal(2016)derive‘curiosity/surprise’fromtheKL-divergence
between the old and new transition models (i.e. after updating based on the ob-
served transition):
(cid:104) (cid:105)
ζ (s,a,s(cid:48))=D T(ω|g ,a,s(cid:48))(cid:107)T(ω|g ) (13)
curiosity KL t t
whereT(ω)denotesthetransitionmodelparametrizedbyω.Together,Equations
9-13illustratehowintrinsicmotivationandappraisaltheoryhavemodelledsimilar
notions,andgivesashortillustrationofthevarietyofconceptsthatareexpressible
in the MDP setting.
It is also important to note that appraisal theory bears similarities to many
‘domain-independent’heuristicsdevelopedintheplanningcommunityRusselletal
(1995).Theseofcourseincludeheuristicswithoutaclearpsychologicalorbiological
interpretation, but we mainly emphasize the potential for cross-breeding between
different research fields. For example, some appraisal theories partition novelty
into three sub-elements: familiarity, suddenness and predictability (Gratch and
Marsella, 2014). Each of these seem to capture different computational concepts,
andsuchinspirationmaybenefitintrinsicmotivationand/orplanningresearchers.
Vice-versa, psychologist could seek for results from the RL or planning literature
to develop and verify psychological theory as well.
There are several other implementations of appraisal dimensions, e.g. by Yu
et al (2015), Lee-Johnson et al (2010), Williams et al (2015), Si et al (2010),
KimandKwon(2010),Hassonetal(2011)andMoussaandMagnenat-Thalmann
(2013). We also encounter a few explicit social dimensions, like social fairness (Yu
etal,2015)andsocialaccountability(Sietal,2010),althoughthelatterforexam-
ple requires some symbolic reasoning on top of the RL paradigm. This illustrates
howcurrentRLalgorithms(fornow)havetroublelearningcomplexsocialphenom-
ena. Some of the appraisal systems also include homeostatic variables (Yu et al,
2015). Both Williams et al (2015) and Lee-Johnson et al (2010) do not mention
appraisal in their paper, but their dimensions can be conceptualized as intrinsic
motivation nevertheless.
Insummary,someappraisal-baseddimensionsrequirecognitivereasoning,and
arehardertoimplement.However,dimensionslikenovelty,motivationalrelevance
and intrinsic pleasantness are frequently implemented (see Table 3). Table 4 pro-
vides a more systematic overview of the actual connections to the RL framework.
Thesefeaturesusuallyrequirelearnedtransitionfunctions,recencyfeaturesorfor-
wardplanningproceduresoverthemodelspace,whichcanallbederivedfromthe
historyg.Alsonotethatasingleconceptmaybeinterpretedinverydifferentways
(Table 4). For example, control and power have been derived from the transitions
function (Kim and Kwon, 2010), from the number of visits to a state (Sequeira
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 15
Table 3 Overviewoffrequentlyinvestigatedappraisaldimensions.
Appraisal dimension Paper
Novelty (Sequeira et al, 2011) (Kim and Kwon, 2010) (Si et al,
2010)(Williamsetal,2015)
Recency (MarinierandLaird,2008)
Control/Power (Marinier and Laird, 2008) (Sequeira et al, 2011) (Kim
andKwon,2010)(Sietal,2010)(Williamsetal,2015)
Motivationalrelevance (Marinier and Laird, 2008) (Sequeira et al, 2011) (Has-
son et al, 2011) (Kim and Kwon, 2010) (Si et al, 2010)
(Williamsetal,2015)
Intrinsicpleasantness (Marinier and Laird, 2008) (Sequeira et al, 2011) (Lee-
Johnsonetal,2010)
Modeluncertainty (MarinierandLaird,2008)(Lee-Johnsonetal,2010)(Kim
andKwon,2010)(Williamsetal,2015)
Socialfairness/attachment (Yuetal,2015)(MoussaandMagnenat-Thalmann,2013)
Socialaccountability (Sietal,2010)(KimandKwon,2010)
Table 4 Overview of the five most frequently investigated appraisal dimensions (columns)
andtheirspecificimplementationsinsixappraisal-basedpapers(rows).Thecelltextindicates
which event causes the associated appraisal dimension to be high. Note that both Williams
etal(2015)andLee-Johnsonetal(2010)donotexplicitlymentionappraisaltheoryastheir
inspiration,buttheydoderiveemotionsfromdimensionsencounteredinappraisaltheory.Only
theimplementationofMarinierandLaird(2008)usesdirectsensoryinformation(forcontrol
andintrinsicpleasantness),whichwouldbetterfitwiththehard-wiredapproachinSection4.4.
All other specifications rely on (an aggregate of) the agent-environment interaction history,
forexampleonanestimatedtransitionmodelT(s(cid:48)|s,a).
Novelty/ Control/ Motivational Intrinsic Model un-
Suddenness power relevance pleasant- certainty
ness
(Kimand Ratioof Entropy HighTD - Lowbelief
Kwon, (cid:80) T(s(cid:48)|s,a)2 reduction b(s)&high
s(cid:48)
2010) andT(s(cid:48)|s,a) byactsel. goaldistance
(Lee- - - - Lowmean Mismatchof
Johnson traveltime modeland
etal,2010) obs.
(Marinier Hightimeto Absenceof Lowdist.to Absenceof Lowprogress
andLaird, laststate obstacles goal obstacles
2008) visit
(Sequeira Low#visits High# Lowdist.to Current -
etal,2011) tostate visitsto goal reward/
state valueratio
(Sietal, LowT ofobs. Lowdist. High - -
2010) transition tohigher absolute
valuestate TD
(Williams Unseen/seen High Partoftask - Lowmodel
etal,2015) ratio success/fail finished accuracy
state-space ratio
et al, 2011), from a forward planning procedure (Si et al, 2010) and from the
overall success of the agent (Williams et al, 2015). We encounter a fundamental
challenge in the field here, namely how to translate abstract cognitive concepts to
explicit (broadly accepted) mathematical expressions.
16 Moerlandetal.
4.3 Value function and reward
The third branch of emotion elicitation methods in RL focusses on the value and
reward functions. We can generally identify four groups: value-based, temporal
difference-based, average reward-based and reward-based (Table 5).
Oneoftheearliestapproachestosequentialdecisionmakingbasedonemotion
was by Bozinovski (1982); Bozinovski et al (1996), who considered emotion to be
the expected cumulative reward (i.e. the state-action value) received from taking
an action in that state. Thereby, Bozinovski actually developed a precursor of
Q-learning grounded in emotional ideas. Other implementations have also consid-
ered emotion as the state value. For example, Matsuda et al (2011) maintains a
separate value function for fear, which is updated when the agent gets penalized.
RecentworkbyJacobsetal(2014)considersthepositiveandnegativepartofthe
state as the hope and fear signal. Another value-based approach is by Salichs and
Malfaz (2012), who model the fear for a particular state as the worst historical
Q-valueassociatedwiththatstate.Assuch,theirmodelremembersparticularbad
locations for which it should be afraid.
Asecondgroupofvaluefunctionrelatedimplementationsofemotionsarebased
on the temporal difference error (TD). For Q-learning, the TD is given by
δ =r(s,a,s(cid:48))+γmaxQ(s(cid:48),a(cid:48))−Q(s,a) (14)
a(cid:48)
There has been extensive research in neuroscience on the connection between
dopamineandtheTD.Followingtheseideas,therehavealsobeenimplementations
connecting happiness and unhappiness to the positive and negative TD, respec-
tively (Moerland et al, 2016; Jacobs et al, 2014; Lahnstein, 2005). Models based
on the temporal difference are robust against shifting the reward function by a
constant (a trait that is not shared by the models of the first group of this sec-
tion). More recently, Moerland et al (2016) extended these ideas by deriving hope
and fear signals from anticipated temporal differences (through explicit forward
simulation from the current node).
Another branch of emotion derivations base themselves on the average re-
ward. For example, Broekens et al (2007a), Schweighofer and Doya (2003) and
Hogewoning et al (2007) derive a valence from the ratio between short- and long-
term average reward. Shi et al (2012) also derives emotions from the temporal
change in reward function, while Blanchard and Canamero (2005) uses the aver-
age reward. Other implementations interpreted the reward ifself as the emotional
signal (Moren and Balkenius, 2000; Balkenius and Mor´en, 1998; Ahn and Picard,
2006).
In conclusion, emotions have been related to the value function, temporal dif-
ferenceerrorordirectderivativeoftherewardfunction(Table5).Notethatsome
implementations try to incorporate a time dimensions as well (besides only the
rewardorvaluesignal),e.g.Moerlandetal(2016),SalichsandMalfaz(2012)and
Broekens et al (2007b).
4.4 Hard-wired
Whileallthreepreviousgroupsusedinternalagent/robotaspects,afinalcategory
specifies hard-wired connections from sensory input to emotions. A first group of
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 17
Table 5 Overview of elicitation methods based on value and/or reward functions. Imple-
mentations are either based on the raw value function, the temporal difference error, some
derivativeofanaveragerewardorfromtherawrewardfunction.
Method Papers
Value (Bozinovski, 1982; Bozinovski et al, 1996) (Matsuda et al, 2011)
(Jacobsetal,2014)(SalichsandMalfaz,2012)
Temporaldifference (Moerlandetal,2016)(Jacobsetal,2014)(Lahnstein,2005)
Averagereward (Broekensetal,2007a)(SchweighoferandDoya,2003)(Hogewoning
etal,2007)(Shietal,2012)(BlanchardandCanamero,2005)
Reward (MorenandBalkenius,2000;BalkeniusandMor´en,1998)(Ahnand
Picard,2006)
implementations use the detected emotional state of another person to influence
the emotion of the agent/robot (Hoey et al, 2013) (Ficocelli et al, 2015). Hasson
et al (2011) uses facial expression recognition systems to detect human emotion,
while Kubota and Wakisaka (2010) uses human speech input. Note that if these
agent emotions subsequently influence agent learning, then we come very close to
learning from human emotional feedback (as briefly described in Section 2.3).
There are several other implementations that pre-specify sensation-emotion
connections. In general, these approaches are less generic compared to the earlier
categories. Some use for example fuzzy logic rules to connect input to emotions
(Ayesh, 2004). Another example we encountered is the previous emotional state
(att−1)influencingthecurrentemotionalstate(KubotaandWakisaka,2010).An
example is the Markovian transition model between emotions in (Ficocelli et al,
2015), with similar ideas in (Zhang and Liu, 2009). This is a reasonable idea for
smoother emotion dynamics, but we still categorize it as hard-wired since it does
not explain how initial emotions should be generated.
Finally, there is also overlap with previously described elicitation methods.
For example, Tsankova (2002) derives an emotion (frustration) directly from the
collision detector. This is very similar to some homeostatic specifications, but
Tsankova does not include a body integrity or pain variable (i.e. it is therefore
notahomeostaticsystem,buttheauthordoesmaketheconnectionbetweenpain
ornon-progressandfrustration).Inconclusion,thehard-wiredemotionelicitation
does not seem to provide us any deeper understanding about emotion generation
in RL agents, but the papers in this category may actually implement ideas from
different elicitation methods.
5 Emotion type
Havingdiscussedthemethodstoelicitemotions,thissectiondiscusseswhichtypes
of emotions are specified. We cover both categorical (5.1) and dimensional (5.2)
emotionmodels.Notehoweverthatsomeappraisaltheory-basedpapersonlyelicit
appraisal dimensions, without specifically identifying emotions (see Table 9).
18 Moerlandetal.
5.1 Categorical
Most papers in the emotion and RL literature elicit categorical emotions. An
overview of the most occurring emotions and their associated papers is presented
in Table 6. Joy (or happiness) is the most implemented emotion by a wide vari-
ety of authors. We did not include the papers that specify a valence dimension
(see Section 5.2), but this could also be interpreted as a happy-sad dimension. A
few papers (Von Haugwitz et al, 2012) (Tanaka et al, 2004) specifically address
Ekman’s six universal emotions (happy, sad, fear, anger, surprise, disgust), while
most papers drop the latter two emotions.
Ingeneral,happy,sad,fearandangerhavebeenimplementedinallelicitation
categories (homeostatic, appraisal and value-based). However, hope has mainly
beenconnectedtovaluefunctionbasedsystems.Theimplementationsofhopetry
to assess anticipation (by addressing the value function (Jacobs et al, 2014), the
dynamics within a decision cycle (Lahnstein, 2005), or explicitly forward simulat-
ing from the current node towards expected temporal differences (Moerland et al,
2016)). Hope therefore needs a time component, a notion which is not directly
available from for example an extrinsic homeostasis dimension.
Anoverviewofthemostoftenelicitedemotions(happy,sad,fearandangry)is
provided in Table 7. The table shows that different elicitation methods have been
associated to similar sets of categorical emotions. For example, anger (fourth col-
umn)hasbeenassociatedtoextrinsichomeostasis(e.g.hunger),intrinsicappraisal
(e.g.non-progress)andreward-based(decreasingreceivedreward)elicitation.Note
that frustration, a closely related emotion, has been associated to obstacle detec-
tion (Tsankova, 2002) and non-progress (Hasson et al, 2011) as well. The other
three emotions in Table 7 have also been associated to each elicitation dimension,
as is easily observed from the colour coding.
NotethatTable7alsoshowshowdifferentresearchersapplydifferentelicitation
methodswithinonepaper(i.e.lookingatrowsinsteadofcolumnsnow).Moreover,
a few papers even combine elicitation methods for an individual emotion. For
example, Williams et al (2015) derives fear from a combination of pain (extrinsic)
and novelty (intrinsic/appraisal). It is important to realize that the elicitation
methods of the previous section are clearly only a framework. These are not hard
separations, and combining different approaches is clearly possible (and probably
necessary), as these papers nicely illustrate.
Finally, many included papers did not fully specify the implemented connec-
tionsbetweenelicitationmethodandemotiontype,makingitdifficulttoreplicate
these studies. For example, Von Haugwitz et al (2012) only mentions the con-
nections between homeostatic dimensions and emotions are based on fuzzy logic,
but does not indicate any principles underlying the real implementation. Similar
problemsoccurin(Tanakaetal,2004),(Ayesh,2004)and(Obayashietal,2012),
while (Zhou and Coggins, 2002) and (Shibata et al, 1997) leave the implemented
connections unspecified.
5.2 Dimensional
Relative to the number of implementations of categorical emotions, there is a
much smaller corpus of work on dimensional emotions (Table 8). The most im-
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 19
Table 6 Overviewofcategoricalemotionimplementations.
Categorical emo- Paper
tion
Joy/happy (GadanhoandHallam,2001)(VonHaugwitzetal,2012)(Ficocelli
et al, 2015) (Tanaka et al, 2004) (Goerke, 2006) (Yu et al, 2015)
(Lee-Johnson et al, 2010) (Williams et al, 2015) (Hasson et al,
2011)(MoussaandMagnenat-Thalmann,2013)(SalichsandMal-
faz, 2012) (Cos et al, 2013) (Moerland et al, 2016) (Jacobs et al,
2014) (Lahnstein, 2005) (Shi et al, 2012) (El-Nasr et al, 2000)
(KubotaandWakisaka,2010)
Sad/unhappy/distress (GadanhoandHallam,2001)(VonHaugwitzetal,2012)(Ficocelli
etal,2015)(Tanakaetal,2004)(Yuetal,2015)(Lee-Johnsonetal,
2010)(MoussaandMagnenat-Thalmann,2013)(SalichsandMal-
faz,2012)(Moerlandetal,2016)(Jacobsetal,2014)(Lahnstein,
2005)(El-Nasretal,2000)(KubotaandWakisaka,2010)
Fear (GadanhoandHallam,2001)(VonHaugwitzetal,2012)(Tanaka
et al, 2004) (Goerke, 2006) (Yu et al, 2015) (Lee-Johnson et al,
2010)(Williamsetal,2015)(SalichsandMalfaz,2012)(Moerland
et al, 2016) (Jacobs et al, 2014) (Matsuda et al, 2011) (Shi et al,
2012)(El-Nasretal,2000)(KubotaandWakisaka,2010)
Anger (GadanhoandHallam,2001)(VonHaugwitzetal,2012)(Ficocelli
et al, 2015) (Tanaka et al, 2004) (Goerke, 2006) (Yu et al, 2015)
(Hassonetal,2011)(MoussaandMagnenat-Thalmann,2013)(Shi
etal,2012)(El-Nasretal,2000)(KubotaandWakisaka,2010)
Surprise (VonHaugwitzetal,2012)(Tanakaetal,2004)(Lee-Johnsonetal,
2010)
Hope (Moerlandetal,2016)(Jacobsetal,2014)(Lahnstein,2005)(El-
Nasretal,2000)
Frustration (Hassonetal,2011)(Huangetal,2012)(Tsankova,2002)
plementeddimensionisvalence.Notsurprisingly,valencehasmostlybeenderived
from reward-based elicitation methods (Broekens et al, 2007a) (Ahn and Picard,
2006) (Zhang and Liu, 2009) (Obayashi et al, 2012) (Hogewoning et al, 2007).
It is also connected to a few extrinsic homeostasis papers (Coutinho et al, 2005)
(Gadanho, 2003), but then it is referred to as ‘well-being’. Although this is not
completely the same concept, we group these together here for clarity.
FollowingthedimensionalemotionmodelsofRussellandBarrett(1999)intro-
duced in Section 2.1, the second most implemented dimension is arousal. Arousal
has been connected to extrinsic homeostatic dimensions (e.g. pain and overall
well-being (Coutinho et al, 2005)), appraisal-like dimensions (e.g. continuation of
incomingstimulus(Kuremotoetal,2013)),andafewhard-wiredimplementations
(Ayesh, 2004)(Guojianget al,2010).Notethat somedonot usethetermarousal
butrefertosimilarconcepts,e.g.relaxation(Coutinhoetal,2005)andrestlessness
(Ayesh,2004).Theonlypapertoextendthevalence-arousalspaceisbyHoeyetal
(2013), who also include control.
Ingeneral,thedimensionalemotionmodelsseemsomewhatunder-represented
compared to the categorical emotion implementations. Although the implemen-
tation for valence shows some consistency among papers, there is more difficulty
to specify arousal or different emotion dimensions. Nevertheless, the continuous
natureofdimensionalemotionmodelsremainsappealingfromanengineeringper-
spective. A possible benefit is the identification of a desirable target area in affec-
tive space, towards which the agent aims to progress (Guojiang et al, 2010).
20 Moerlandetal.
Table 7 Overview of four categorical emotion (columns) elicitations for different papers
(rows). The text in each cell specifies the elicitation condition. We observe different cate-
gories of emotion elicitation, i.e. homeostatic (blue, Section 4.1), appraisal (green, 4.2) and
value-based(red,4.3).Weseehowsingleemotionsareconnectedtodifferentelicitationmeth-
ods(multiplecoloursinsinglecolumn)andhowsinglepapersusedifferentelicitationmethods
(multiplecoloursinsinglerow).
Happy/Joy Sad/Distress Fear Anger
(Gadanhoand Highenergy Lowenergy Pain High
Hallam,1998) restlessness
(lowprogress)
(Goerke,2006) Alldriveslow - Homesick& Hunger&
lowenergy homesick&
highenergy
(Kimand Goal Nogoal Pain Noprogress
Kwon,2010) achievement achievement
(Williams Progress& - Pain&novelty -
etal,2015) control&low
pain
(Salichsand Positivedelta Negativedelta Worst -
Malfaz,2012) well-being well-being historical
Q(s,a)
(Moerland PositiveTD NegativeTD Anticipated -
etal,2016) negativeTD
(Shietal, Increasing - Increasing Decreasing
2012) positivereward negative positivereward
reward
(Yuetal, High Egoisticagent Agentdefects Agent
2015) well-being &low &others co-orperates&
well-being co-orperate othersdefect
Table 8 Overviewofdimensionalemotionimplementations.
Dimensional Paper
emotion
Valence (Kuremoto et al, 2013) (Ahn and Picard, 2006) (Zhang and Liu, 2009)
(Broekensetal,2007a)(Broekens,2007)(Obayashietal,2012)(Hogewon-
ingetal,2007)(Hoeyetal,2013)(Guojiangetal,2010)(Coutinhoetal,
2005)
Arousal (Kuremotoetal,2013)(Obayashietal,2012)(Ayesh,2004)(Hoeyetal,
2013)(Guojiangetal,2010)(Coutinhoetal,2005)
Control (Hoeyetal,2013)
6 Emotion function
We now discuss the ways in which emotions may influence the learning loop. It
turnsoutemotionshavebeenimplicatedwithallmainaspectsofthisloop:Reward
(6.1), State (6.2), Adaptive Critic (6.3) and Actor (6.4). Finally, emotion has also
been studied as an epiphenomenon, i.e. without any effect on the learning loop,
but for example to communicate the learning/behavioural process to other social
companions (6.5). These categories are visualized in Figure 1 (labels I-V). Note
thatthisSectionintroducesthewaysinwhichemotionmayinfluencetheRLloop
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 21
on a conceptual level. We summarize the resulting effect, for example on learning
efficiency, in Section 7.
6.1 Reward modification
AlargegroupofemotionalRLimplementationsuseemotionstomodifythereward
function. These approaches add an additive term to the reward function that
relies on emotions (we have only encountered additive specifications). The reward
function is given by
r =r˜ +r(cid:52) (15)
t t t
where r˜(t) denotes the external reward function and r(cid:52)(t) an internal reward
based on emotional mechanisms. In the RL community, Eq. 15 is known as re-
ward shaping(Ngetal,1999).Theinternalrewardcanbetargetedatmaximizing
positive emotions, but is also frequently associated to homeostatic variables or
appraisal dimensions (see Sections 4.1 and 4.2 for elicitation). However, the gen-
eral underlying principle usually remains that agents seek to maximize positive
emotions and minimize negative emotions.
Homeostasis. Forhomeostaticsystemstherewardbecomesdependentonthecur-
rent state of the internal homeostatic variables. Some implementations use the
difference in overall well-being,
r(cid:52) =W −W =D −D (16)
t t t−1 t−1 t
wherethestepfromwell-beingW tooveralldriveD naturallyfollowsfromEqua-
tion (7). In this specification, the acquisition of food does not provide any reward
iftheassociatedhomeostaticvariable(e.g.energy/sugarlevel)isalreadysatiated.
Implementations of the above idea can be found in (Gadanho and Hallam, 2001),
(Salichs and Malfaz, 2012) and (Cos et al, 2013). Variants of this have focussed
on using positive emotions (instead of well-being) as the reinforcement learning
signal, e.g. in (Gadanho and Hallam, 1998) and (Goerke, 2006).
Appraisal-based. Similar ideas are used for appraisal-based reward modifications.
SomeexamplesofappraisaldimensionspecificationswerediscussedinSection4.2,
with some formal examples in Equations 9-13. Appraisal dimensions are related
to generic concepts of the agent history (novelty, recency, consistency of observa-
tions with world model) and expectations with respect to the goal (motivational
relevance,intrinsicpleasantness).Severalstudiesintheintrinsicallymotivatedre-
inforcement learning literature have identified the learning and survival benefit of
thesedimensions(OudeyerandKaplan,2007;Oudeyeretal,2007).Someauthors
therefore took appraisal theory as an inspiration to develop intrinsic motivation
features.
Specifications in this direction therefore usually take the following form:
J
r(cid:52) = (cid:88) φ ζ (g ) (17)
t j j t
j=1
22 Moerlandetal.
for J appraisal variables and φ denoting the weight of the j-th appraisal dimen-
j
sion. We could for example use the two features in Equations 9-10, specifying an
agent that gets rewarded for motivational relevance and recency. Note that ap-
praisal specifications usually do not include the difference with (t−1), probably
because they are usually assumed not to satiate (i.e. no underlying homeostatic
dynamics). We also note that a reward bonus for novelty (e.g. as in Eq. 12) is in
the RL literature usually referred to as ‘optimism in the face of uncertainty’, i.e.
we want to explore where we have not been yet.
Sequeira et al (2011) actually tries to optimize the vector of weights φ (with
respect to overall goal achievement). In a more recent publication, Sequeira et al
(2014) also extends this work to actually learn the required appraisal dimensions
through genetic programming. Similar ideas can be found in Marinier and Laird
(2008). One of the problems with both implementations is the distance-to-goal
heuristicusedbybothemotion-basedagents,whichhasaccesstoadditionalinfor-
mationcomparedtothebaselineagent(althoughtheheuristicdoesnotmonoton-
ically increase with the actual distance to goal). We discuss the empirical results
of these papers more systematically in Section 7.
6.2 State modification
Emotionshavealsobeenusedaspartofthestate-space(learningemotionspecific
value functions and policies). An example is the social robot Maggie (Castro-
Gonza´lez et al, 2013). When fear is elicited it becomes part of the state-space
(replacing the dominant drive in a homeostatic system), which makes Maggie
learn fear-specific action values.
SomepapersexplicitlywriteQ(s,a,e),whereedenotestheemotionalstate,to
illustrate this dependency (Ahn and Picard, 2006) (Ayesh, 2004). More examples
of such implementations can be found in (Zhang and Liu, 2009) (Ficocelli et al,
2015)(Obayashietal,2012)and(Matsudaetal,2011).HoeydevelopedaPOMDP
variantcalledBayesianAffectControlTheorythatincludesthethree-dimensional
emotional space (valence, control, arousal) of a companion (Hoey et al, 2013) and
the agent itself (Hoey and Schr¨oder, 2015). There are also implementations that
use reinforcement learning to model the affective state of a human or group (Kim
and Cho, 2015), but note that this is a different setting (i.e. RL to steer human
emotional state instead of agent emotional state).
Usingemotiontomodifythestatecanalsobeseenasaformofrepresentation
learning.Therearenotmanyarchitecturesthatlearnthemodification(mosthard-
code the emotion elicitation), with the exception of Williams et al (2015). Their
architecture has similarities to the bottle-neck structure frequently encountered
indeepneuralnetworkresearch,forexamplein(deep)auto-encoders(Goodfellow
et al, 2016). We return to the fully-learned approach in the Discussion (Section
8).
6.3 Meta-learning
Theprevioustwosectionsshowedhowemotionhasbeenimplicatedwithdetermin-
ing both the reward and state, which together can be considered as the (Internal)
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 23
Critic. Afterwards, the state and reward are used to learn a value function, a pro-
cess that is usually referred to as the Adaptive Critic (see Figure 1). The learning
process requires appropriate (and tedious) scaling of learning parameters, most
noteworthy the learning rate α (see Section 2.4).
The connection between emotion and these learning parameters was inspired
by the work of Doya (2000, 2002). He identified neuroscientific grounding for the
connection between several neurotransmitters and several reinforcement learning
parameters. In particular, he proposed connections between dopamine and the
temporaldifferenceerror(δ),serotoninandthediscountfactor(γ),noradrenaline
and the Boltzmann action selection temperature (β) and acetylcholine and the
learning rate (α).
This work inspired both Shi et al (2012) and Von Haugwitz et al (2012) to
implementemotionalsystemsinfluencingthesemetaparameters.Shiidentifiesthe
connections joy → δ, anger → β, fear → α and relief → γ, while von Haugwitz
changes only the latter two to surpise →(1−α) and fear →(1−γ).
Recently, Williams et al (2015) also investigated metaparameter steering in
navigation tasks. Together with (Sequeira et al, 2014) they are the only ones
to learn the emotional connections, and then post-characterize the emerged phe-
nomena. Williams trains a classifier connecting a set of primary reinforcers (both
appraisal and homeostasis-based) to the metaparameters of their navigation algo-
rithm.Theytraintwoemotionalnodes,andonlyafterwardsanthropomorphicized
these. One node learned positive connections to progress and control and nega-
tively to pain and uncertainty, while it caused the robot to increase its speed and
reduce the local cost bias. In contrary, their second node was elicited by pain and
novelty,whileitcausedtheoppositeeffectofnode1.Theyafterwardscharacterized
these nodes as ‘happy’ and ‘fear’, respectively.
6.4 Action selection
The final step of the RL loop involves action selection. This incorporates another
crucial RL challenge, being the exploration/exploitation trade-off. Emotions have
long been implicated with action readiness, and we actually already encountered
two papers steering the Boltzmann action selection temperature β above (as it
is technically also a metaparameter of the RL system). We next focus on those
papers that specifically target action selection.
One branch of research focusses on directly modifying the exploration param-
eter.Broekensetal(2007b,a)hasdoneextensiveinvestigationsoftheconnections
betweenvalenceandtheexploration/exploitationtrade-off.Inoneimplementation
(Broekensetal,2007a)selectionwasbasedoninternalsimulation,whereavalency
determined the threshold for the simulation depth. In another paper (Broekens
et al, 2007b) this valency directly influenced the β parameter in a Boltzmann
action selection mechanism. Schweighofer and Doya (2003) applied small pertur-
bations to the exploration parameters based on emotion, and subsequently kept
the parameters if they performed better. Finally, Hogewoning et al (2007) inves-
tigated a hybrid system of Broekens and Schweighofer, trying to combine their
strengths.
Other papers use emotion to switch between multiple sets of value functions,
thereby effectively determining which set should currently be used for action se-
24 Moerlandetal.
lection. For example, both Tsankova (2002) and Hasson et al (2011) use a high
frustration to switch between behaviour. Similarly, Kubota and Wakisaka (2010)
use several emotions to switch between the weighting of different value functions.
For example, happiness leads to exploration by selecting a value function derived
from inverse recency. Note that such a recency feature was used in the appraisal
section described previously, but there it modified the reward function, while now
emotionisusedtoswitchbetweenvaluefunctions.Althoughthistechnicallyleads
to similar behaviour, emotion intervenes at a different level.
6.5 Epiphenomenon
Thefinal categoryof functions ofemotions seemsanemptyone: Epiphenomenon.
Several papers have studied emotion elicitation in RL, without the emotion influ-
encing the learning or behavioural loop. These papers usually focus on different
evaluationcriteriaaswell(seeSection7).Examplesofpapersthatonlyelicitemo-
tionsare(Coutinhoetal,2005),(Goerke,2006),(Sietal,2010),(KimandKwon,
2010),(Bozinovski,1982;Bozinovskietal,1996),(Jacobsetal,2014),(Lahnstein,
2005) and (Moerland et al, 2016).
There can however still be a clear function of the emotion for the agent in a
social communication perspective (node V in Figure 1). Emotion may communi-
cate the current learning and behavioural process, and also create empathy and
userinvestment.Thepotentialofemotionstocommunicateinternalstateanden-
hance empathy is infrequently evaluated in current reinforcement learning related
emotion literature. This seems a fruitful direction when emotions serve to make
an agent or robot more sociable and likeable.
This concludes our discussion of emotion functions in RL agents. The full
overviewisprovidedinTable10,whichmainlyliststhecategoriesperpaper.The
most important connections between Sections 4-6 (i.e. column 1 to 3 in Table 9)
were described in the text and tables (e.g. Table 4 and 7).
7 Evaluation
This section systematically addresses the embodiment, test scenario and main
empiricalresultsfoundinthedifferentpapers.Asystematicoverviewofthissection
is provided in Table 10.
7.1 Embodiment
We can grossly identify 5 embodiment categories: standard single agent, multiple
agents, screen agents, simulated robot and real robot. The standard agent set-
ting usually concerns a (gridworld) navigation simulation in some environment
designed by the researcher. Some agents are also designed to appear on a screen
for interaction with a user (El-Nasr et al, 2000). Another group of embodiments
concern simulated or real robots. Simulated robots are based on models of exist-
ingrealrobots,i.e.theyusuallyincorporatemorerealisticphysicsandcontinuous
controls.
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 25
There are also real robotic implementations in navigation and resource tasks.
However,severalroboticimplementations(especiallythoseinvolvinghumaninter-
action) use the robot mainly as physical embodiment (without moving much, for
exampleinadialoguetask).Overall,mostimplementationshavefocussedonsimu-
latedagents.Itisimportanttonotethatmoststate-spacesstayrelativelysmall,i.e.
sensory information usually has narrow bandwidth (or is assumed to be appropri-
atelypre-processed).Althoughthisfacilitatesinterpretation,aremainingquestion
is whether the current emotion modelling methods scale to high-dimensional and
complex problems.
7.2 Test scenario
Emotionimplementationshavebeentestedindifferentscenarios:navigationtasks
with resources and/or obstacles, multiple agent interaction settings and human-
agent/robot interaction tasks.
Thereisawidevarietyofnavigationtaskswithadditional(multiple)resources
andobstacles(withassociatedpositiveandnegativerewards).Whenresourcesand
obstaclesarenon-stationaryweusuallyseetheterminology‘prey’and‘predators’.
Within this group we mainly see navigation tasks with a single goal and multiple
obstacles(i.e.‘mazes’(MarinierandLaird,2008)orrobotnavigation(Lee-Johnson
et al, 2010) (Williams et al, 2015)). A second group involves multiple resources,
which are mostly connected to underlying homeostatic systems to investigate be-
haviour switching. A few tasks also specifically include virtual enemies (Sequeira
et al, 2011) or humans with adversarial intentions (Castro-Gonza´lez et al, 2013)
(Tanaka et al, 2004).
A second, much smaller group of scenarios involves multiple agents in a social
simulation scenario, either a competitive (Von Haugwitz et al, 2012) (Yu et al,
2015)orco-operativeone(Matsudaetal,2011).Thethirdcategoryteststheirim-
plementationininteractionwithhumans.Thiscaneitherinvolveahumandialogue
task (Ficocelli et al, 2015) (Moussa and Magnenat-Thalmann, 2013) or physical
interaction with a human (Blanchard and Canamero, 2005) (Shibata et al, 1997).
Ingeneral,mostpapershaveconstructedtheirownscenario.Wehavenotseen
any test scenarios being borrowed from other emotion-learning implementations,
norfromthegeneralreinforcementlearningliterature.Thismakesithardtocom-
pare different implementations amongst each other.
7.3 Main results
Finally, we discuss what empirical results were found by the various authors. We
identify three main categories in which emotions may be useful to the agent:
learning efficiency, emotion dynamics and human-robot interaction (HRI) (Table
10, third column).
Learning efficiency. Mostauthorsinemotion-RLresearchhavefocussedonlearn-
ing efficiency (see Table 10). Overall, emotions have been found beneficial in a
variety of learning tasks. Agents with emotional functionality achieved higher av-
eragerewards(GadanhoandHallam,2001;Sequeiraetal,2014;Yuetal,2015)or
26 Moerlandetal.
learned faster (Marinier and Laird, 2008; Ahn and Picard, 2006; Zhang and Liu,
2009).Othersresearchersfocussedontheabilitytoavoidspecificnegativerewards,
like the ability to avoid collisions (Gadanho and Hallam, 2001; Lee-Johnson et al,
2010)andnavigateawayfromobstacles(Shietal,2012).Otherresearchersreport
improved behaviour switching, where emotional agents better alternate between
goals (Cos et al, 2013; Hasson et al, 2011; Goerke, 2006). Finally, some authors
specificallyshowimprovedexploration(Broekensetal,2007b).Manyauthorsthat
focussed on learning performance do compare to a non-emotional baseline agent,
which is of course a necessary comparison. Altogether, the results show emotions
may be a useful inspiration to improve learning performance of RL agents.
Emotion dynamics. A second group of researchers focusses on emotion dynamics,
usually comparing the emergent emotion signals to known psychological theories.
For example, Jacobs et al (2014) showed patterns of habituation and extinction,
MorenandBalkenius(2000)reproducedblocking,whileBlanchardandCanamero
(2005)observedapproachandavoidancebehaviourintheiremotionalagent.Other
researchers qualitatively interpret whether the emotion dynamics fit the (social)
interaction(Tanakaetal,2004)(MoussaandMagnenat-Thalmann,2013)oroccurs
at appropriate states in the scenario (Moerland et al, 2016). Altogether, results
in this category show that emotion in RL agents might be a viable tool to study
emotion theories in computational settings.
Human-robotinteraction. Finally,athirdgroupofresearchersfocussesonhuman-
robot interaction evaluation. Their primary focus is to show how emotions may
benefit social interaction with humans, usually by taking questionnaires with the
participantsaftertheexperiment.ParticipantsofFicocellietal(2015)reportmore
effectivecommunication,participantsofEl-Nasretal(2000)foundtheagentmore
convincing, and participants of Shibata et al (1997) report an increased notion of
connection as well as increased perception of robot intelligence. Kim and Kwon
(2010) describe an enhanced pleasant feeling of the participant after the human-
agent interaction. Therefore, there is clear indication that emotion in RL agents
maybenefitaninteractivelearningsetting.However,therearerelativelyfewpapers
in this category compared to the other two, and this may be a direction for more
research.
8 Discussion
This article surveyed the available work on emotion and reinforcement learning
in agents and robots, by systematically categorizing emotion elicitation, type and
function in RL agents. We first summarize the main results and identify the chal-
lenges encountered throughout the article.
Emotions have been elicited from extrinsic motivation (in combination with
homeostasis), intrinsic motivation (in combination with appraisal), value and re-
ward functions and as hard-wired implementation. We want to emphasize again
thatextrinsicmotivationandhomeostasisarenotsynonyms,norareintrinsicmo-
tivations and appraisal (see Section 3). The hard-wired emotion elicitation seems
least useful, as it does not provide any deeper understanding about emotion gen-
eration, and is by definition hand-crafted to the task. The other three elicitation
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 27
methods are useful and appear to address different aspects of emotions. Home-
ostasis focusses on the inner resource status, appraisal on the inner model status
and value/reward focusses on the learning process. They seem to cover different
aspectsofemotions.Forexample,surpriseseemsonlyelicitablefromamodel,joy
fromfoodrequiresextrinsicmotivationandhomeostasis,whileaspectslikeantici-
pated change need value functions. Finally, note that there remains slight overlap
among categories, i.e. they serve as a framework, but are not mutually exclusive.
This is also illustrated by the overlap among implementations in Table 7.
Regarding emotion types we observed a relatively larger corpus of categori-
cal implementations than dimensional models. Although dimensional models are
appealing from an engineering perspective, they are usually implemented in 1D
(valence) or 2D (valence-arousal) space. This makes it challenging to implement
a diverse set of emotions. We do want to present a hypothesis here: dimensional
and categorical emotions may fit into the same framework, but at different levels.
Concepts like ‘well-being’, as encountered throughout this survey, do not appear
tobecategoricalemotions,butcouldbeinterpretedasvalence.However,anagent
can have categorical emotions on top of a well-being/valence system, joining both
emotion types in one system. Similarly, arousal could be related to the speed of
processing of the RL loop, also entering the RL process at a different level.
Finally, emotion function could involve nearly every node in the RL loop:
reward, state, value function and action selection. It seems like all approaches
are useful, as each element targets a different RL challenge. The fifth emotion
function category (epiphenomenon) should get more attention because it involves
a different kind of usefulness (communicative). Although quite some papers are
focussing on emotion dynamics, there is less work on evaluating the potential
of emotions to communicate the learning process. Thomaz and Breazeal (2006)
found that transparency of the learner’s internal process (in their case through
the robot’s gaze direction) can improve the human’s teaching. We hypothesize
emotionalcommunicationtoexpressinternalstatemayserveasimilarrole,which
is a topic that could get more research attention in the future.
Advice for implementation. Weexpectthisarticleisusefultoengineerswhowant
toimplementemotionalfunctionalityintheirRL-basedagentorrobot.Weadvise
to first consider what type of functionality is desired. When the goal is to have
emotions visualize agent state, or have believable emotions to enhance empathy
anduserinvestment,thenemotionscanbeimplementedasanepiphenomenon(i.e.
focusonSections4and5).Thereadercouldforexamplefirstdecideonthedesired
emotiontypes,andthencheckwhichavailableelicitationmethodsseemapplicable
(e.g.viaTable9).Whenonedesiresemotionfunctionintheiragent/robotaswell,
thenSection6becomesrelevant.Weadvisethereadertofirstconsiderthedesired
functionality, e.g. a more adaptive reward function, learning parameter tuning, or
modulated exploration, and then work ‘backwards’ to emotion type and emotion
elicitation.Readersmayverifywhetherthereareexistingimplementationsoftheir
requirements through the colour coding in Table 9.
Ingeneral,webelieveresearchersinthefieldshouldstartfocussingonintegrat-
ingapproaches.Thissurveyintendedtoprovideaframeworkandcategorizationof
emotion elicitation and function, but it seems likely that these categories actually
jointly occur in the behavioural loop. We look forward to systems that integrate
multipleapproaches.Moreover,wewanttoemphasizethepaperbyWilliamsetal
28 Moerlandetal.
(2015) that took a fully learned approach. Their system contains nodes that were
trainedfortheirfunctionalbenefit,andlateroncharacterizedfortheemotionpat-
terns.Weexpectsuchanapproachtobothbemorerobustagainstthecomplexity
problems encountered when developing integrated systems, and to transfer more
easily between problem settings as well.
Testingandqualityofthefield. Wealsosystematicallycategorizedthetestingsce-
nariosandevaluationcriteria(Section7andTable10).Thereareseveralpointsto
be noted about the current testing. First we want to stress a point already made
by Can˜amero (2003), who noted that ‘one should not put more emotion in the
agentthanwhatisrequiredbythecomplexityofthesystem-environmentinterac-
tion’. Many of the current implementations design their own (grid) world. While
these artificial worlds are usually well-suited to assess optimization behaviour, it
isfrequentlyhardtoassesswhichemotionsshouldbeelicitedbytheagentateach
point in the world. On the other hand, more realistic scenarios quickly become
high-dimensional, and therefore the challenge changes to a representation learn-
ing problem. Potentially, the advances in solving more complex AI scenarios with
(deep) RL (Silver et al, 2016; Mnih et al, 2015) may provide more realistic test
scenarios in the future as well.
There are two other important observations regarding testing and evaluation.
We have not encountered any (emotional) scenario being reproduced by other
researchers. This appears to us as an important problem. To enhance the stan-
dardofthefield,researchersshouldstartreproducingscenariosfromother’swork
to compare with, or borrow from different RL literature. The second topic we
want to emphasize is the use of different evaluation criteria. Researchers should
choose whether they target learning efficiency, emotion dynamics or HRI criteria.
If learning performance is your criterion, then your implementation must include
a baseline. When you focus on emotion dynamics, then you should try to validate
by a psychological theory, or ideally compare to empirical (human) data. When
you focus on human interaction criteria, then this should usually involve a ques-
tionnaire.Althoughquestionnairesseemstobeconsistentpracticealready,wedid
observeauthorsreportingonasmallersubsetofthequestions(i.e.posingtherisk
to have a few results pop out by statistical chance).
Thisbringsustoafinalprobleminthefield,beingthethoroughnessofthepa-
pers.Frequentlywewereunabletofullydeducethedetailsofeachimplementation.
Indeed a full system description with all the details requires valuable space, but
ontheotherhand,awell-informedcolleaguereadingaconferencepapershouldbe
able to reproduce your results. Only listing the homeostatic/appraisal variables
and the emotions that were implemented does not provide deeper understand-
ing about how the system works. This also makes it harder to compare between
implementations. Differences in notational conventions and slight differences in
definitions further complicate comparisons. Paying attention to these aspects of
reproducibility, for example sticking to conventional RL notation (Sutton and
Barto, 1998), will facilitate broader uptake of the work in this field.
Future. A core challenge for the future will be to integrate all aspects into one
larger system, potentially taking a fully learned approach. Along the same line, it
is a remaining challenge of this field (and AI in general) to translate higher-level
(psychological) concepts into implementable mathematical expressions. Examples
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 29
of such translations can be found in Equations 9-13, and we expect comparing
differenttranslationsmayhelpidentifymoreconsensus.AtleasttheRLframework
provides a common language to start comparing these translations.
With social robots increasingly positioned at our research horizon, we expect
interestinemotioninfunctionalagentstoincreaseintheforthcomingyears.How-
ever, the current implementations seldomly investigate the full social interaction.
Although this is a very high-level AI challenge, we believe research should fo-
cus in this direction to show empirical success. This involves all aspects of RL
in a social context, i.e. robots learning from human demonstration (LfD) (Argall
etal,2009),learningfromhumanfeedback(possiblyemotional(Broekens,2007)),
human emotions influencing agent emotions, and agent emotions communicating
internal processes back to humans.
From an affective modelling perspective, it is promising to see how a cogni-
tive theory like appraisal theory turns out to be well-applicable to MDP settings.
Apartfromintegratingimportantlinesofemotionandlearningresearch,thisalso
illustrateshowcognitiveandlearningtheoriesarenotmutuallyexclusive.Wehope
the affective modelling community will start to benefit from the literature on in-
trinsic motivation in RL as well (Bratman et al, 2012). A crucial requisite herein
will be improving the types of problems that (model-based) RL can solve. Many
scenarios that are interesting from an affective modelling viewpoint, for example
high-dimensional social settings, are still challenging for RL. Advances in deep
reinforcement learning (Mnih et al, 2015) might make more complex scenarios
available soon. However, for affective modelling we especially need the transition
functionandmodel-basedRL(DeisenrothandRasmussen,2011).Recentworkhas
also shown the feasibility of high-dimensional transition function approximation
(Oh et al, 2015) in stochastic domains (Moerland et al, 2017) under uncertainty
(Houthooft et al, 2016). Further progress in this direction should make the ideas
covered in this survey applicable to more complicated scenarios as well.
9 Conclusion
This article surveyed emotion modelling in reinforcement learning (RL) agents.
The literature has been structured according to the intrinsically motivated RL
framework.Weconcludebyidentifyingthemainbenefitsencounteredinthiswork
forthemachinelearning(ML),human-robotinteraction(HRI),andaffectivemod-
elling(AM)communities.Formachinelearning,emotionmaybenefitlearningeffi-
ciencybyprovidinginspirationforintrinsicmotivation,explorationandformeta-
parametertuning.Thecurrentresultsshouldstimulatefurthercross-overbetween
(intrinsic) motivation, model-based RL and emotion-RL research. For HRI re-
search,emotionsobviouslyareimportantforsocialinteraction.Moreworkshould
be done on implementing emotion models in interactive reinforcement learning
algorithms, for which the survey presents a practical guideline on implementing
emotionsinRLagents.Foraffectivemodelling,weconcludethatcognitivetheories
(like appraisal theory) can well be expressed in RL agents. The general benefits
of RL agents (they require little assumptions, are easily applicable to all kinds
of domains, and allow for learning) make them a promising test-bed for affec-
tive modelling research. This survey identifies opportunities for future work with
respect to implementation and evaluation of emotion models in RL agents.
30 Moerlandetal.
Table9:Systematicoverviewofemotionelicitation,emotiontypeandemotionfunc-
tioninthereinforcementlearningloop(seeFigure1).Papersareorderedbytheir
elicitationmethod(firstcolumn).Notethatforhomeostaticspecification,wetryto
use the terms mentioned in the original paper, which may sometimes refer to the
drive(i.e.thedeficitinhomeostaticvariable)ratherthanthehomeostaticdimen-
sionitself.Colourcodingisbasedonthefirsttermmentionedineachcell,grouping
thecategoriesasencounteredinSections4-6andTable1.
Paper Emotion Elicitation Emotion Type Emotion Function
(Gadanho Homeostasis: hunger, Categorical: happiness, Reward modification:
and Hal- pain, restlessness, tem- sadness,fear,anger positive emotion is
lam, perature, eating, smell, reward
1998, warmth,proximity
2001)
(Gadanho, Homeostasis:energy,wel- Dimensional:well-being Reward modification:
2003) fare,activity delta well-being is re-
ward
(Cos Homeostasis: hunger, Categorical: hedonic Reward modification:
et al, tiredness,restlessness value delta well-being is re-
2013) ward
(Coutinho Homeostasis: blood Dimensional: wellness, Epiphenomenon
et al, sugar, energy, pain, vas- relaxation,fatigue
2005) cularvolume,endorphine
(Von Homeostasis: hunger, fa- Categorical: happiness, Metalearning: reward =
Haugwitz tigue,interest sadness, anger, surprise, delta happiness, learning
et al, fear,disgust. rate = (1-surprise), dis-
2012) count factor = (1-fear),
Boltzmann temperature
=anger
(Tanaka Homeostasis: hunger, Categorical: happiness, Epiphenomenon:gesture,
et al, fullness, pain, comfort, sadness, anger, surprise, voice,facialexpression
2004) fatigue,sleepiness disgust,fear,neutral
(Goerke, Homeostasis: fatigue, Categorical: happiness, Reward modification:
2006) hunger, homesickness, fear,anger,boredom positive emotion is
curiosity reward
(Sequeira Appraisal: valency, con- None Reward modification:
et al, trol,novelty,motivation summed appraisals
2011, addedtorewardfunction
2014)
(Marinier Appraisal: suddenness, None Reward modification:
and intrinsic pleasantness, summed appraisals is
Laird, relevance, conducive- reward
2008) ness, discrepancy from
expectation, control,
power.
(Yu et al, Appraisal:socialfairness Categorical: happiness, Reward modification:
2015, Value:averagereward sadness,fear,anger positive/negative emo-
2013) tion is positive/negative
reward
(Lee- Appraisal: model mis- Categorical: Happiness, Reward modification:
Johnson match sadness,fear,anger,sur- change local reward
et al, Value: average achieved prise (happy & suprise higher,
2010, reward, global planned fear&angerlower)
2007) reward
Homeostatic:collision
(Williams Appraisal: novelty, Categorical: happiness, Metalearning: happy
et al, progress, control, uncer- fear(post-characterized) gives positive reward
2015) tainty bias and higher travel
Homeostatic:pain. speed,feargivernegative
reward bias and lower
travelspeed
(Si et al, Appraisal: motivational None Epiphenomenon
2010) relevance & congruence,
accountability, control,
novelty.
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 31
(Kim and Appraisal: unexpected- Dimensional: valence, Epiphenomenon: facial
Kwon, ness, motive consistency, arousal (not fully ex- avatar, voice, movement
2010) control, uncertainty, plicit) ofears,music
agency/accountability..
(Hasson Appraisal:non-progress Categorical: frustration, Action selection: switch
et al, Humanaffectivestate anger,happiness betweentargets
2011)
(Moussa Appraisal: desirability, Categorical: joy, dis- Reward modification:
and attachment(OCCmodel) tress, happy for, resent- reward is difference of
Magnenat- ment,sorryfor,gloating, largest positive and
Thalmann, gratitude, admiration, negativecurrentemotion
2013) anger,reproach.
(Huang Appraisal: motivational Categorical:Happy,sad, Epiphenomenon
et al, relevance + goal reach- anger, surprise, fear,
2012) able frustration
(Kuremoto Appraisal: distance to Dimensional: valence, Action selection: sepa-
et al, goal, continuation of arousal rateemotionalQ-valueas
2013) elicitingevent part of total summed Q-
value
(Castro- Value: worst historical Categorical: happiness, Reward modification:
Gonz´alez Q-value+ sadness,fear deltawell-being
et al, Homeostasis: energy, State modification: fear
2013; boredom, calm, loneli- replaces dominant moti-
Salichs ness vation(whenthresholdis
and exceeded)
Malfaz,
2012)
(Ahn and Reward: difference be- Dimensional: feeling Action selection: emo-
Picard, tweenexperiencedreward good,bad tional Q-value is part of
2006) and expected immediate totalQ-value
reward of best two avail-
ableactions
(Zhang Reward: difference be- Dimensional: feeling Action selection: emo-
and Liu, tweenexperiencedreward good/bad tional Q-value is part of
2009) and expected immediate totalQ-value
rewardofbestaction
(Broekens Reward:shortversuslong Dimensional:valence Actionselection:emotion
et al, termaveragereward tunesexplorationparam-
2007a,b) eterandsimulationdepth
(Moerland Value: Anticipated tem- Categorical:hope,fear Epiphenomenon
et al, poraldifference
2016)
(Jacobs Value: temporal dif- Categorical: joy, dis- Epiphenomenon
et al, ference and posi- tress,hope,fear
2014) tive/negative part of
value
(Bozinovski, Value None Epiphenomenon
1982)
(Moren Value None Epiphenomenon
and
Balke-
nius,
2000)
(Lahnstein, Value: temporal differ- Categorical: happiness, Epiphenomenon
2005) ence sadness,hope.
(Obayashi Reward:notexplicit Dimensional: valence, State modification: emo-
et al, Hard-wired:not-explicit arousal(withunlabelled tionspecificQ-value
2012) categories)
(Matsuda Reward:onlynegativere- Categorical:fear Actionselection:separate
et al, ward emotional value function
2011) ispartofactionselection
(SchweighoferReward:midversuslong- None Metalearning: perturba-
and termaveragereward tionofdiscount,learning
Doya, andtemperatureparame-
2003; terbasedonemotion.
Doya,
2002)
32 Moerlandetal.
(HogewoningReward: short/mid ver- Dimensional:valence Actionselection:emotion
et al, suslong-termaveragere- tunes exploration (com-
2007) ward bines (Broekens et al,
2007b)and(Schweighofer
andDoya,2003)withchi-
squaretest)
(Shietal, Reward: change in re- Categorical: joy, fear, Metalearning: joy = TD,
2012) wardsignal anger,relief anger = temperature,
fear = learning rate, re-
lief=discountparameter
(connectionnotexplicit)
(Blanchard Reward:average Categorical:comfort Metalearning: emotion
and modulates the learning
Canamero, rate
2005)
(El-Nasr Value: combined with Categorical: joy, sad- Action selection: emo-
et al, fuzzylogic ness, disappointment, tionsareinputtoafuzzy
2000) relief, hope, fear, pride, logicactionselectionsys-
shame, reproach, anger, tem
gratitude, gratification,
remorse
(Kubota Hard-wired:fromobjects Categorical: happiness, Action selection: switch
and Wak- (users, balls, chargers, sadness,fear,anger betweenvaluefunctions
isaka, obstacles), speech and
2010) previousemotionalstate
(Ayesh, Hard-wired: from state Dimensional: restless, State modification: emo-
2004) through fuzzy cognitive neutral,stable tionspecificQ-values
maps
(Ficocelli Humanaffectivestate Categorical: happiness, Statemodification
et al, Hard-wired neutral,sadness,angry. Action selection: modify
2015) intonationofspeech
(Hoey Hard-wired from object Dimensional: valence, State modification: ex-
and observations(socialinter- control,arousal tended POMDP deriva-
Schr¨oder, action) tion with 3D emotional
2015) state
(Tsankova, Hardwired:fromobstacle Categorical:frustration Actionselection:emotion
2002) detectors controlsthebalancingbe-
tweenvaluefunctions
(Zhou Hardwired: from sight of None Reward modification:
and Cog- resources reward calculated from
gins, Homeostasis: hunger, maximum emotion or
2002) thirst (not connected to motivation.
emotionbuttoreward)
(Doshi Hard-wired:fromsightof Categorical: Contented, Actionselection:emotion
andGmy- enemyorresource. elation,fear,panic. adjust planning depth
trasiewicz, andbiasesconsideredac-
2004) tions
(GmytrasiewiHczard-wired: Markovian Categorical: Coopera- Meta-learning: emotion
and transition from previous tive, slightly annoyed, biasestransitionfunction
Lisetti, emotionsandstate angry Actionselection:emotion
2002) biases available action
subset, biases value
function
(Guojiang Hard-wired: from exte- Dimensional: valence, State modification: 2D
et al, rior incentive like safety, arousal emotionalstatespace
2010) threat, fancy, surprise Reward modification:
(assumedpre-given) agentshouldmovetode-
sirable area in emotional
space (implementation
notspecified)
(Shibata Notexplicit Notexplicit Notexplicit
et al,
1997)
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 33
Table 10: Systematic overview of test embodiment, scenario, evaluation criterion
andmainresults.PapersareorderedaccordingtoTable9.Colourcodingpresented
fortheevalutioncriterioncolumn.
Paper Embodi- Scenario Criterion Main result
ment
(Gadanho Simulated Multiple Learning Lesscollisionsandhigheraveragereward
and Hal- robot resource withemotionalagent.
lam, 1998, task
2001;
Gadanho,
2003)
(Cosetal, Grid- Multiple Learning Emergent behavioural cycles fulfilling
2013) world resource differentdrives
agent task
(Coutinho Grid- Multiple - Noemotionresults
et al, world resource
2005) agent task
(Von Multiple Game / Learning Increased average reward compared to
Haugwitz agents competi- non-emotionalagents
et al, tion
2012)
(Tanaka Real Human Dynamics Appropriate emotion response (fear and
et al, robot interacting joy)tobadandgoodactingperson.
2004) ( hitting/
padding
robot)
(Goerke, Simulated Multiple Learning Different behaviour types with emotion
2006) robot + resource functionality
realrobot task
(Sequeira Grid- Resource- Learning Improved average fitness compared to
et al, world predator non-appraisalagent
2011) agent task
(Marinier Grid- Maze Learning Emotional agent needs less learning
and Laird, world episodes
2008) agent
(Yu et al, Multiple Game/ne- Learning Emotional/social agents have higher av-
2015, agents gotiation eragerewardandshowco-operation
2013)
(Lee- Simulated Navigation Learning Emotional agent has less collisions and
Johnson robot task more exploration, against a higher aver-
et al, agetraveltime
2010,
2007)
(Williams Real Navigation Learning Less collisions with fear enabled, more
et al, robot task explorationwithsurprise,quickerroutes
2015) withhappinessenabled.
(Si et al, Multiple Social Dynamics Differentappraisalwithdeeperplanning
2010) agents interaction + Social accountability realistically de-
rived (compared to other computational
model).
(Kim and Real Social in- HRI Users report higher subjective feeling
Kwon, robot teraction of interaction and higher pleasantness
2010) (question for emotional robot + humans correctly
game) with identifypartoftheunderlyingrobotap-
human praisalsbasedonaquestionnaire
(Hasson Real Multiple Learning Robot with emotion can switch between
et al, robot resource drives (in case of obstacles) and escape
2011) navigation deadlocks.
task
(Moussa Real Human Dynamics Appropriate emotion responses to
and robot dialogue +Learn- friendly and unfriendly users + learn
Magnenat- task (while ing differentattitudestowardsthem.
Thalmann, playing
2013) game)
(Huang Grid- Navigation Dynamics Dynamics show how emotion elicitation
et al, world task varies with planning depth and goal
2012) agent achievementprobability.
34 Moerlandetal.
(Kuremoto Grid- Predator Learning Quicker goal achievement for emotional
et al, world task agentcomparedtonon-emotionalagent.
2013) agent
(Castro- Real Multiple Learning Less harmful interactions compared to
Gonz´alez robot resources + Dy- non-fear robot + realistic fear dynamics
et al, task in- namics (comparedtoanimal)
2013; cluding
Salichs human
and Mal- objects
faz,2012)
(Ahn and Agent Conditioning Learning Affective agent learns optimal policy
Picard, experiment faster.
2006)
(Zhang Simulated Navigation Learning Emotionalrobotneedslesstrialstolearn
and Liu, robot task thetask.
2009)
(Broekens Grid- Maze Learning Emotional control of simulation depth
et al, world improvesaveragereturn.Emotionalcon-
2007a,b) agent trolofexplorationimprovestimetogoal
andtimetofindtheglobaloptimum.
(Moerland Grid- Resource- Dynamics Appropriate hope and fear anticipation
et al, world predator inspecificPacmanscenarios.
2016) agent + task
Pacman
(Jacobs Grid- Maze Dynamics Emotion dynamics (habituation, extinc-
et al, world tion)simulatedrealisticallycomparedto
2014) agent psychologicaltheory.
(Bozinovski, Grid- Maze Learning Firstinvestigationofemotionasprimary
1982; world reward,showsagentisabletosolvemaze
Bozi- agent task.
novski
et al,
1996)
(Moren Agent Conditioning Dynamics Agent shows habituation, extinction,
andBalke- experiment blocking(i.e.oflearningsignal,notemo-
nius,2000; tion)
Balke-
nius and
Mor´en,
1998)
(Lahnstein, Real- Multiple Dynamics Models dynamics within single decision
2005) robot objects cycle,showsplausibleanticipation,hedo-
grasping nicexperienceandsubsequentdecay.
task
(Obayashi Grid- Maze Learning Emotionalagentneedslessstepstogoal
et al, world (ordinaryagentdoesnotconverge).
2012) agent
(Matsuda Multiple Co- Learning Emotional agents show more co-
et al, agent operation operation and adapt better to envi-
2011) grid- task ronmental change compared to non-
world emotionalagents.
(SchweighoferAgent Conditioning Learning Dynamicadaptationofmeta-parameters
and Doya, experiment in both static and dynamic environ-
2003; + Sim- ment. Task not achieved for fixed meta-
Doya, ulated parameters.
2002) pendulum
(Hogewoning Grid- Maze Learning Emotional agent cannot improve results
et al, world of (Broekens et al, 2007b; Schweighofer
2007) agent andDoya,2003)
(Shi et al, Grid- Obstacle Learning Emotional agent avoids obstacle better.
2012) world and re- + Dy- Differentemotionleadtodifferentpaths.
agent source namics
task
(Blanchard Real Conditioning Dynamics Robot can imprint desirable stimuli
and robot task based on comfort (reward) signal, and
Canamero, subsequentlyshowapproachoravoidance
2005) behaviour.
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 35
(El-Nasr Screen Human HRI Users perceive agent with emotional ac-
et al, agent interaction tionselectionasmoreconvincing.
2000) task
(Kubota Simulated Multiple Dynamics Emotional robot avoids dangerous areas
and Wak- robot objectsand due to fear, and starts exploring when
isaka, human happy.
2010)
(Ayesh, Real None None None
2004) robot
(Ficocelli Real Human di- HRI + Effective emotion expression (user ques-
et al, robot aloguetask Dynam- tionnaire)+Robotchangingemotionsto
2015) ics + satisfydifferentdrives
Learning
(Hoey and Agent Social Dynamics Modelcanaccuratelymodifyowndimen-
Schr¨oder, agent sionalemotionwithrespecttotheclient
2015) interaction itisinteractingwith.
(Tsankova, Simulated Navigation Learning Emotionalrobotreachesgoalmoreoften,
2002) robot task. butneedmoretimesteps.
(Zhou and Real Multiple Learning Emotional robot has higher average re-
Coggins, robot resources ward and less intermediate behaviour
2002) switching compared to non-emotional
robot.
(Doshi Grid- Multiple Learning Emotional agent (with meta-learning)
and Gmy- world resource, has higher average return compared to
trasiewicz, predator non-emotionalagent.
2004) task
(GmytrasiewicNzone None (the- None None
and oretical
Lisetti, model)
2002)
(Guojiang Agent Conditioning Dynamics Agent moves towards beneficial emo-
et al, task tionalstate-spaceandstaysthere.
2010)
(Shibata Real Human HRI Humans reported a coupling with the
et al, robot stroke/pad robot, some reported it as intelligent.
1997) robot Subjects report positive emotions them-
selves.
References
AhnH,PicardRW(2006)Affectivecognitivelearninganddecisionmaking:Theroleofemotions.
In:EMCSR2006:The18thEurop.Meet.onCyber.andSyst.Res.
AntosD,PfefferA(2011)Usingemotionstoenhancedecision-making.In:ProceedingsoftheInter-
nationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence(IJCAI),vol22,p24
ArgallBD,ChernovaS,VelosoM,BrowningB(2009)Asurveyofrobotlearningfromdemonstration.
Roboticsandautonomoussystems57(5):469–483
Ayesh A (2004) Emotionally motivated reinforcement learning based controller. In: Systems, Man
andCybernetics,2004IEEEInternationalConferenceon,IEEE,vol1,pp874–878
Balkenius C, Mor´en J (1998) A computational model of emotional conditioning in the brain. In:
ProceedingsofWorkshoponGroundingEmotionsinAdaptiveSystems,Zurich
BaumeisterRF,VohsKD,DeWallCN,ZhangL(2007)Howemotionshapesbehavior:Feedback,an-
ticipation,andreflection,ratherthandirectcausation.PersonalityandSocialPsychologyReview
11(2):167–203
Belavkin RV (2004) On relation between emotion and entropy. In: Proceedings of the AISB’04
SymposiumonEmotion,CognitionandAffectiveComputing.,AISBPress,pp1–8
Blanchard AJ, Canamero L (2005) From imprinting to adaptation: Building a history of affective
interaction. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Epigenetic Robotics, Lund
UniversityCognitiveStudies,pp23–30
BozinovskiS(1982)Aself-learningsystemusingsecondaryreinforcement.CyberneticsandSystems
Researchpp397–402
Bozinovski S, Stojanov G, Bozinovska L (1996) Emotion, embodiment, and consequence driven
systems.In:ProcAAAIFallSymposiumonEmbodiedCognitionandAction,pp12–17
BratmanJ,SinghS,SorgJ,LewisR(2012)Strongmitigation:Nestingsearchforgoodpolicieswithin
search for good reward. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Autonomous
AgentsandMultiagentSystems-Volume1,InternationalFoundationforAutonomousAgentsand
MultiagentSystems,pp407–414
36 Moerlandetal.
Breazeal C (2003) Emotion and sociable humanoid robots. International Journal of Human-
ComputerStudies59(1):119–155
BroekensJ(2007)Emotionandreinforcement:affectivefacialexpressionsfacilitaterobotlearning.
In:ArtificalIntelligenceforHumanComputing,Springer,pp113–132
BroekensJ,KostersWA,VerbeekFJ(2007a)Affect,anticipation,andadaptation:Affect-controlled
selectionofanticipatorysimulationinartificialadaptiveagents.AdaptiveBehavior15(4):397–422
Broekens J, Kosters WA, Verbeek FJ (2007b) On affect and self-adaptation: Potential benefits of
valence-controlledaction-selection.In:Bio-inspiredmodelingofcognitivetasks,Springer,pp357–
366
BroekensJ,BosseT,MarsellaSC(2013)ChallengesinComputationalModelingofAffectivePro-
cesses.AffectiveComputing,IEEETransactionson4(3):242–245
CalvoR,D’MelloS,GratchJ,KappasA(2014)Handbookofaffectivecomputing
CalvoRA,D’MelloS(2010)AffectDetection:AnInterdisciplinaryReviewofModels,Methods,and
TheirApplications.AffectiveComputing,IEEETransactionson1(1):18–37,DOI10.1109/t-affc.
2010.1
Can˜ameroD(1997a)Ahormonalmodelofemotionsforbehaviorcontrol.VUBAI-LabMemo2006
Can˜amero D (1997b) Modeling motivations and emotions as a basis for intelligent behavior. In:
ProceedingsofthefirstinternationalconferenceonAutonomousagents,ACM,pp148–155
Can˜amero D (2003) Designing emotions for activity selection in autonomous agents. Emotions in
humansandartifacts115:148
Castro-Gonza´lezA´,MalfazM,SalichsMA(2013)Anautonomoussocialrobotinfear.Autonomous
MentalDevelopment,IEEETransactionson5(2):135–151
Chentanez N, Barto AG, Singh SP (2004) Intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning. In: Ad-
vancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,pp1281–1288
CosI,Can˜ameroL,HayesGM,GilliesA(2013)Hedonicvalue:enhancingadaptationformotivated
agents.AdaptiveBehaviorp1059712313486817
CoutinhoE,MirandaER,CangelosiA(2005)Towardsamodelforembodiedemotions.In:Artificial
intelligence,2005.epia2005.portugueseconferenceon,IEEE,pp54–63
DamasioAR(1994)Descartes’Error:Emotion,ReasonandtheHumanBrain.Grosset/Putnam
DeisenrothM,RasmussenCE(2011)PILCO:Amodel-basedanddata-efficientapproachtopolicy
search.In:Proceedingsofthe28thInternationalConferenceonmachinelearning(ICML-11),pp
465–472
Doshi P, Gmytrasiewicz P (2004) Towards affect-based approximations to rational planning: a
decision-theoretic perspective to emotions. In: Working Notes of the Spring Symposium on Ar-
chitecturesforModelingEmotion:Cross-DisciplinaryFoundations
DoyaK(2000)Metalearning,neuromodulation,andemotion.Affectiveminds101
DoyaK(2002)Metalearningandneuromodulation.NeuralNetworks15(4):495–506
DunnBD,DalgleishT,LawrenceAD(2006)Thesomaticmarkerhypothesis:Acriticalevaluation.
Neuroscience&BiobehavioralReviews30(2):239–271,DOI10.1016/j.neubiorev.2005.07.001,URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149763405001053
EkmanP,FriesenWV,O’SullivanM,ChanA,Diacoyanni-TarlatzisI,HeiderK,KrauseR,LeCompte
WA,PitcairnT,Ricci-BittiPE,etal(1987)Universalsandculturaldifferencesinthejudgments
offacialexpressionsofemotion.Journalofpersonalityandsocialpsychology53(4):712
El-NasrMS,YenJ,IoergerTR(2000)Flame—fuzzylogicadaptivemodelofemotions.Autonomous
AgentsandMulti-agentsystems3(3):219–257
Ficocelli M, Terao J, Nejat G (2015) Promoting Interactions Between Humans and Robots Using
RoboticEmotionalBehavior.IEEETransactionsonCyberneticspp1–13
FongT,NourbakhshI,DautenhahnK(2003)Asurveyofsociallyinteractiverobots.Roboticsand
autonomoussystems42(3):143–166
FranklinS,MadlT,D’melloS,SnaiderJ(2014)LIDA:Asystems-levelarchitectureforcognition,
emotion,andlearning.AutonomousMentalDevelopment,IEEETransactionson6(1):19–41
Frijda NH, Kuipers P, Ter Schure E (1989) Relations among emotion, appraisal, and emotional
actionreadiness.Journalofpersonalityandsocialpsychology57(2):212
GadanhoS,HallamJ(1998)Emotiontriggeredlearningforautonomousrobots.DAIResearchPaper
Gadanho SC (2003) Learning behavior-selection by emotions and cognition in a multi-goal robot
task.Thejournalofmachinelearningresearch4:385–412
GadanhoSC,HallamJ(2001)Robotlearningdrivenbyemotions.AdaptiveBehavior9(1):42–64
Gmytrasiewicz PJ, Lisetti CL (2002) Emotions and personality in agent design and modeling. In:
Gametheoryanddecisiontheoryinagent-basedsystems,Springer,pp81–95
Goerke N (2006) EMOBOT: a robot control architecture based on emotion-like internal values.
INTECHOpenAccessPublisher
GoodfellowI,BengioY,CourvilleA(2016)Deeplearning.MITPress
GratchJ,MarsellaS(2014)Appraisalmodels.OxfordUniversityPress
GuojiangW,XiaoxiaoW,KechangF(2010)Behaviordecisionmodelofintelligentagentbasedon
artificialemotion.In:AdvancedComputerControl(ICACC),20102ndInternationalConference
on,IEEE,vol4,pp185–189
HassonC,GaussierP,BoucennaS(2011)Emotionsasadynamicalsystem:theinterplaybetween
themeta-controlandcommunicationfunctionof´emotions.Paladyn2(3):111–125
Hester T, Stone P (2012a) Intrinsically motivated model learning for a developing curious agent.
In:2012IEEEInternationalConferenceonDevelopmentandLearningandEpigeneticRobotics
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 37
(ICDL),IEEE,pp1–6
Hester T, Stone P (2012b) Learning and using models. In: Reinforcement Learning, Springer, pp
111–141
HoeyJ,Schro¨derT(2015)BayesianAffectControlTheoryofSelf.In:AAAI,Citeseer,pp529–536
HoeyJ,SchroderT,AlhothaliA(2013)Bayesianaffectcontroltheory.In:AffectiveComputingand
IntelligentInteraction(ACII),2013HumaineAssociationConferenceon,IEEE,pp166–172
Hogewoning E, Broekens J, Eggermont J, Bovenkamp EG (2007) Strategies for affect-controlled
action-selection in Soar-RL. In: Nature Inspired Problem-Solving Methods in Knowledge Engi-
neering,Springer,pp501–510
Houthooft R, Chen X, Duan Y, Schulman J, De Turck F, Abbeel P (2016) Curiosity-driven
Exploration in Deep Reinforcement Learning via Bayesian Neural Networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:160509674
HuangX,DuC,PengY,WangX,LiuJ(2012)Goal-orientedactionplanninginpartiallyobserv-
able stochastic domains. In: Cloud Computing and Intelligent Systems (CCIS), 2012 IEEE 2nd
InternationalConferenceon,IEEE,vol3,pp1381–1385
HullCL(1943)Principlesofbehavior:anintroductiontobehaviortheory.Appleton-Century
Jacobs E, Broekens J, Jonker CM (2014) Emergent dynamics of joy, distress, hope and fear in
reinforcementlearningagents.In:AdaptiveLearningAgentsworkshopatAAMAS2014
JoffilyM,CoricelliG(2013)Emotionalvalenceandthefree-energyprinciple.PLOSComputational
Biology9(6)
Johnson-Laird PN, Oatley K (1992) Basic emotions, rationality, and folk theory. Cognition and
Emotion6(3-4):201–223
KahnemanD,TverskyA(1979)Prospecttheory:Ananalysisofdecisionunderrisk.Econometrica:
JournaloftheEconometricSocietypp263–291
Keramati M, Gutkin BS (2011) A reinforcement learning theory for homeostatic regulation. In:
Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,pp82–90
KimHR,KwonDS(2010)Computationalmodelofemotiongenerationforhuman–robotinteraction
basedonthecognitiveappraisaltheory.JournalofIntelligent&RoboticSystems60(2):263–283
Kim KH, Cho SB (2015) A Group Emotion Control System based on Reinforcement Learning.
SoCPaR2015
KnoxWB,GlassB,LoveB,MaddoxWT,StoneP(2012)HowHumansTeachAgents.International
Journal of Social Robotics 4(4):409–421, DOI 10.1007/s12369-012-0163-x, URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s12369-012-0163-x
Knox WB, Stone P, Breazeal C (2013) Training a Robot via Human Feedback: A Case Study,
LectureNotesinComputerScience,vol8239,SpringerInternationalPublishing,booksection46,
pp460–470
KoberJ,PetersJ(2012)Reinforcementlearninginrobotics:Asurvey.In:ReinforcementLearning,
Springer,pp579–610
KonidarisG,BartoA(2006)Anadaptiverobotmotivationalsystem.In:FromAnimalstoAnimats
9,Springer,pp346–356
Kubota N, Wakisaka S (2010) Emotional model based on computational intelligence for partner
robots.In:Modelingmachineemotionsforrealizingintelligence,Springer,pp89–108
KuremotoT,TsurusakiT,KobayashiK,MabuS,ObayashiM(2013)Animprovedreinforcement
learningsystemusingaffectivefactors.Robotics2(3):149–164
LahnsteinM(2005)Theemotiveepisodeisacompositionofanticipatoryandreactiveevaluations.
In:Proc.oftheAISB’05SymposiumonAgentsthatWantandLike,pp62–69
Laird JE (2008) Extending the Soar cognitive architecture. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and
Applications171:224
LazarusRS(1991)Cognitionandmotivationinemotion.Americanpsychologist46(4):352
LeDouxJ(2003)Theemotionalbrain,fear,andtheamygdala.Cellularandmolecularneurobiology
23(4-5):727–738
Lee-JohnsonCP,CarnegieD, etal(2007)Emotion-basedparameter modulation for ahierarchical
mobilerobotplanningandcontrolarchitecture.In:IntelligentRobotsandSystems,2007.IROS
2007.IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceon,IEEE,pp2839–2844
Lee-JohnsonCP,CarnegieD,etal(2010)Mobilerobotnavigationmodulatedbyartificialemotions.
Systems,Man,andCybernetics,PartB:Cybernetics,IEEETransactionson40(2):469–480
Lhommet M, Marsella SC (2015) Expressing Emotion Through Posture and Gesture, Oxford Uni-
versityPress,pp273–285
LisettiC,HudlickaE(2014)WhyandHowtoBuildEmotion-basedAgentArchitectures
MarinierR,LairdJE(2008)Emotion-drivenreinforcementlearning.Cognitivesciencepp115–120
MarsellaS,GratchJ,PettaP(2010)Computationalmodelsofemotion.KrScherer,tBa¨nziger&
eroesch(eds),Ablueprintforaffectivecomputingpp21–45
Marsella SC, Gratch J (2009) EMA: A process model of appraisal dynamics. Cognitive Systems
Research10(1):70–90,URLhttp://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article
MatsudaA,MisawaH,HorioK(2011)Decisionmakingbasedonreinforcementlearningandemotion
learningforsocialbehavior.In:FuzzySystems(FUZZ),2011IEEEInternationalConferenceon,
IEEE,pp2714–2719
Michaud F (2002) EMIB—Computational Architecture Based on Emotion and Motivation for In-
tentionalSelectionandConfigurationofBehaviour-ProducingModules.CognitiveScienceQuar-
terly3-4:340–361
38 Moerlandetal.
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG, Graves A, Riedmiller M,
FidjelandAK,OstrovskiG,etal(2015)Human-levelcontrolthroughdeepreinforcementlearning.
Nature518(7540):529–533
MoerlandTM,BroekensJ,JonkerCM(2016)FearandHopeEmergefromAnticipationinModel-
basedReinforcementLearning.In:ProceedingsoftheInternationalJointConferenceonArtificial
Intelligence(IJCAI),pp848–854
MoerlandTM,BroekensJ,JonkerCM(2017)LearningMultimodalTransitionDynamicsforModel-
BasedReinforcementLearning.arXivpreprintarXiv:170500470
MorenJ,BalkeniusC(2000)Acomputationalmodelofemotionallearningintheamygdala.From
animalstoanimats6:115–124
MoussaMB,Magnenat-ThalmannN(2013)Towardsociallyresponsibleagents:integratingattach-
mentandlearninginemotionaldecision-making.ComputerAnimationandVirtualWorlds24(3-
4):327–334
Murphy RR, Lisetti CL, Tardif R, Irish L, Gage A (2002) Emotion-based control of cooperating
heterogeneousmobilerobots.RoboticsandAutomation,IEEETransactionson18(5):744–757
Ng AY, Harada D, Russell S (1999) Policy invariance under reward transformations: Theory and
applicationtorewardshaping.In:ICML,vol99,pp278–287
Obayashi M, Takuno T, Kuremoto T, Kobayashi K (2012) An emotional model embedded rein-
forcementlearningsystem.In:Systems,Man,andCybernetics(SMC),2012IEEEInternational
Conferenceon,IEEE,pp1058–1063
OchsM,NiewiadomskiR,PelachaudC(2015)FacialExpressionsofEmotionsforVirtualCharacters,
OxfordUniversityPress,pp261–272
Oh J, Guo X, Lee H, Lewis RL, Singh S (2015) Action-conditional video prediction using deep
networksinatarigames.In:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,pp2863–2871
Ortony A, Clore GL, Collins A (1990) The cognitive structure of emotions. Cambridge university
press
OsgoodCE,SuciGJ,TannenbaumPH(1964)Themeasurementofmeaning.UniversityofIllinois
Press
OudeyerPY,KaplanF(2007)Whatisintrinsicmotivation?atypologyofcomputationalapproaches.
Frontiersinneurorobotics1
Oudeyer PY, Kaplan F, Hafner VV (2007) Intrinsic motivation systems for autonomous mental
development.EvolutionaryComputation,IEEETransactionson11(2):265–286
PaivaA,LeiteI,RibeiroT(2015)Emotionmodelingforsocialrobots,OxfordUniversityPress,pp
296–308
ParisiD,PetrosinoG(2010)Robotsthathaveemotions.AdaptiveBehavior18(6):453–469
Reisenzein R (2009) Emotional experience in the computational belief–desire theory of emotion.
EmotionReview1(3):214–222
Rolls ET, Baylis LL (1994) Gustatory, olfactory, and visual convergence within the primate or-
bitofrontalcortex.TheJournalofneuroscience14(9):5437–5452
RollsET,GrabenhorstF(2008)Theorbitofrontalcortexandbeyond:fromaffecttodecision-making.
Progressinneurobiology86(3):216–244
RumbellT,BarndenJ,DenhamS,WennekersT(2012)Emotionsinautonomousagents:comparative
analysisofmechanismsandfunctions.AutonomousAgentsandMulti-AgentSystems25(1):1–45
RummeryGA,NiranjanM(1994)On-lineQ-learningusingconnectionistsystems.Tech.rep.,Uni-
versityofCambridge,DepartmentofEngineering
RussellJA(1978)Evidenceofconvergentvalidityonthedimensionsofaffect.Journalofpersonality
andsocialpsychology36(10):1152
RussellJA,BarrettLF(1999)Coreaffect,prototypicalemotionalepisodes,andotherthingscalled
emotion:dissectingtheelephant.Journalofpersonalityandsocialpsychology76(5):805
RussellS,NorvigP,IntelligenceA(1995)Amodernapproach.ArtificialIntelligencePrentice-Hall,
EgnlewoodCliffs25:27
Salichs MA, Malfaz M (2012) A new approach to modeling emotions and their use on a decision-
makingsystemforartificialagents.AffectiveComputing,IEEETransactionson3(1):56–68
SchererKR(1999)Appraisaltheory.Handbookofcognitionandemotionpp637–663
Scherer KR, Schorr A, Johnstone T (2001) Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods, re-
search.OxfordUniversityPress
SchweighoferN,DoyaK(2003)Meta-learninginreinforcementlearning.NeuralNetworks16(1):5–9
SequeiraP,MeloFS,PaivaA(2011)Emotion-basedintrinsicmotivationforreinforcementlearning
agents.In:Affectivecomputingandintelligentinteraction,Springer,pp326–336
SequeiraP,MeloFS,PaivaA(2014)Learningbyappraising:anemotion-basedapproachtointrinsic
rewarddesign.AdaptiveBehaviorp1059712314543837
ShiX,WangZ,ZhangQ(2012)ArtificialEmotionModelBasedonNeuromodulatorsandQ-learning.
In:FutureControlandAutomation,Springer,pp293–299
ShibataT,YoshidaM,YamatoJ(1997)Artificialemotionalcreatureforhuman-machineinteraction.
In:Systems,Man,andCybernetics,1997.ComputationalCyberneticsandSimulation.,1997IEEE
InternationalConferenceon,IEEE,vol3,pp2269–2274
Si M, Marsella SC, Pynadath DV (2010) Modeling appraisal in theory of mind reasoning. Au-
tonomousAgentsandMulti-AgentSystems20(1):14–31
SilverD,HuangA,MaddisonCJ,GuezA,SifreL,VanDenDriesscheG,SchrittwieserJ,Antonoglou
I,PanneershelvamV,LanctotM,etal(2016)MasteringthegameofGowithdeepneuralnetworks
EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 39
andtreesearch.Nature529(7587):484–489
Singh S, Lewis RL, Barto AG, Sorg J (2010) Intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning: An
evolutionaryperspective.AutonomousMentalDevelopment,IEEETransactionson2(2):70–82
Sutton RS (1988) Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine learning
3(1):9–44
SuttonRS,BartoAG(1998)Reinforcementlearning:Anintroduction.MITpressCambridge
TanakaF,NodaK,SawadaT,FujitaM(2004)Associatedemotionanditsexpressioninanenter-
tainmentrobotQRIO.In:EntertainmentComputing–ICEC2004,Springer,pp499–504
ThomazAL,BreazealC(2006)Teachablecharacters:Userstudies,designprinciples,andlearning
performance.In:IntelligentVirtualAgents,Springer,pp395–406
ThomazAL,BreazealC(2008)Teachablerobots:Understandinghumanteachingbehaviortobuild
moreeffectiverobotlearners.ArtificialIntelligence172(6):716–737
ThorpeS,RollsE,MaddisonS(1983)Theorbitofrontalcortex:neuronalactivityinthebehaving
monkey.ExperimentalBrainResearch49(1):93–115
Tsankova DD (2002) Emotionally influenced coordination of behaviors for autonomous mobile
robots. In: Intelligent Systems, 2002. Proceedings. 2002 First International IEEE Symposium,
IEEE,vol1,pp92–97
VelasquezJ(1998)Modelingemotion-baseddecision-making.Emotionalandintelligent:Thetangled
knotofcognitionpp164–169
VinciarelliA,PanticM,HeylenD,PelachaudC,PoggiI,D’ErricoF,Schr¨oderM(2012)Bridgingthe
gapbetweensocialanimalandunsocialmachine:Asurveyofsocialsignalprocessing.Affective
Computing,IEEETransactionson3(1):69–87
VonHaugwitzR,KitamuraY,TakashimaK(2012)Modulatingreinforcement-learningparameters
usingagentemotions.In:SoftComputingandIntelligentSystems(SCIS)and13thInternational
SymposiumonAdvancedIntelligentSystems(ISIS),2012Joint6thInternationalConferenceon,
IEEE,pp1281–1285
WatkinsCJCH(1989)Learningfromdelayedrewards.PhDthesis,UniversityofCambridgeEngland
WieringM,VanOtterloM(2012)Reinforcementlearning.Adaptation,Learning,andOptimization
12
Williams H, Lee-Johnson C, Browne WN, Carnegie DA (2015) Emotion inspired adaptive robotic
pathplanning.In:EvolutionaryComputation(CEC),2015IEEECongresson,IEEE,pp3004–
3011
YuC,ZhangM,RenF(2013)Emotionalmultiagentreinforcementlearninginsocialdilemmas.In:
PRIMA2013:PrinciplesandPracticeofMulti-AgentSystems,Springer,pp372–387
YuC,ZhangM,RenF,TanG(2015)EmotionalMultiagentReinforcementLearninginSpatialSocial
Dilemmas.IEEETransactionsonNeuralNetworksandLearningSystems26(12):3083–3096
ZhangH,LiuS(2009)Designofautonomousnavigationsystembasedonaffectivecognitivelearning
anddecision-making.In:RoboticsandBiomimetics(ROBIO),2009IEEEInternationalConfer-
enceon,IEEE,pp2491–2496
ZhouW,CogginsR(2002)Computationalmodelsoftheamygdalaandtheorbitofrontalcortex:A
hierarchicalreinforcementlearningsystemforroboticcontrol.In:AI2002:AdvancesinArtificial
Intelligence,Springer,pp419–430
