Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making in
Supervised Machine Learning: A Survey
Felix Mohr1* and Jan N. van Rijn2
1Universidad de La Sabana, Ch´ıa, Cundinamarca, Colombia.
2Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden
University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):
felix.mohr@unisabana.edu.co;
Contributing authors: j.n.van.rijn@liacs.leidenuniv.nl;
Abstract
Learningcurvesareaconceptfromsocialsciencesthathasbeenadopted
in the context of machine learning to assess the performance of a learn-
ing algorithm with respect to a certain resource, e.g., the number of
training examples or the number of training iterations. Learning curves
have important applications in several machine learning contexts, most
notablyindataacquisition,earlystoppingofmodeltraining,andmodel
selection. For instance, learning curves can be used to model the per-
formance of the combination of an algorithm and its hyperparameter
configuration, providing insights into their potential suitability at an
early stage and often expediting the algorithm selection process. Var-
ious learning curve models have been proposed to use learning curves
for decision making. Some of these models answer the binary deci-
sion question of whether a given algorithm at a certain budget will
outperformacertainreferenceperformance,whereasmorecomplexmod-
els predict the entire learning curve of an algorithm. We contribute a
framework that categorises learning curve approaches using three cri-
teria: the decision-making situation they address, the intrinsic learning
curve question they answer and the type of resources they use. We
surveypapersfromtheliteratureandclassifythemintothisframework.
Keywords:learningcurves,supervisedmachinelearning
1
5202
naJ
82
]GL.sc[
2v05121.1022:viXra
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
2 Learning Curves for Decision Making
1 Introduction
Learning curves describe a system’s performance on a task as a function of
some resource to solve that task. There can be a pre-defined budget of that
resource,limitingtheamountofresourcesthatcanbespent.Inothercases,the
goal can be to obtain reasonable results while minimising the spent budget of
thatresource.Typicaltypesofbudgetsarethenumberofexamples thelearner
has observed before performing the task or the number of iterations or time
thelearnerspendsinanenvironment.Theperformancemeasureexpressesthe
quality of the obtained model, e.g., error rate or F1 measure. Learning curves
are an important source of information for making decisions on the following
matters in machine learning:
•
Data Acquisition determines how many data points should reasonably be
acquired to obtain a desired performance. The top right plot in Fig. 1 visu-
alisesascenariowherewehavealreadyobservedperformanceuptoacertain
amountofdata(thebluelearningcurve).Wecanextrapolatethisandmake
a prediction of what the performance would be if more data was available,
i.e., the value of the orange extrapolation at different vertical pink lines in
the figure (see, e.g., Last, 2009; Weiss and Tian, 2008).
•
Early Stopping of training a model. If we are committed to some specific
learner (a learning algorithm and its hyperparameters), we might want to
minimise the training time (John and Langley, 1996; Provost et al, 1999)
or avoid over-fitting (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al, 2016). The middle
right plot in Fig. 1 visualises a scenario where we have already observed
performanceuptoacertainamountofbudget,andbasedontheprogression
of the learning curves on recent iterations, a decision can be made whether
to continue the learning or terminate it.
•
Early Discarding in model selection. If we want to select from various mod-
els, we want to stop the evaluation of a candidate when we are reasonably
certainthat itis notcompetitive tothe best-knownsolution (Domhanetal,
2015;MohrandvanRijn,2023;Swerskyetal,2014).Thebottomrightplot
of Fig. 1 visualises a scenario where we have already observed performance
up to a certain amount of budget (the blue learning curve) and already
an incumbent performance obtained by an earlier configuration (horizon-
tal dashed pink line). By using learning curve extrapolation techniques, we
candeterminewhetherthecurrentconfigurationcansurpasstheincumbent
configuration;if not,discarding thecurrenttraining process early(as in the
case shown) would be justified.
Many techniques with varying complexity and required resources have been
proposed to address either of these problems. The complexity ranges from
approachesthatsimplyrecognisewhetheranalreadyobservedpartofalearn-
ing curve has converged (Bishop, 1995; Provost et al, 1999) to the creation
of parametric learning curve models, which capture a belief model for the
behaviourofvariouslearnersatanypossiblebudget(Kleinetal,2017b).While
simple approaches may only rely on the observations made so far for a learner
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 3
Fig. 1:Thethreetypesofdecision-makingsituationsinwhichlearningcurves
aretypicallyused.Thex-axisofeachfigurerepresentsthebudgetintheappli-
cable unit, and the y-axis represents the performance.
on the dataset of interest, more complex approaches may rely on additional
resources such as learning curves or features of other datasets (see, e.g., Leite
and Brazdil, 2010) or learners (see, e.g., Chandrashekaran and Lane, 2017) or
both (see, e.g., Ruhkopf et al, 2023).
Our contribution is a unified framework of the usage of learning curves for
decision making in machine learning and an extensive review of the literature
of approaches that fall within this framework. This framework categorises the
existing literature along the following three axes:
1. The type of decision-making situation, i.e., whether it is used to make
decisions about data acquisition, early stopping, or early discarding. See
Sec. 4.1 for more details.
2. The type of technical question that can be answered with an approach,
e.g., some approaches can only answer the binary question whether a
model has converged, whereas other approaches are able to answer ques-
tions about the behaviour of any part of the learning curve. See Sec. 4.2
for more details.
3. The data resources that are used to model the learning curve. For exam-
ple, in some cases, data from different algorithms on the same dataset
is being used, whereas in other cases, data from the same algorithm on
other datasets. See Sec. 4.3 for more details.
We perform an extensive literature survey in which we categorise published
learning curve extrapolation models along the various axes of this framework.
ThisliteraturesurveyissubjectofSec.5,whichisthensummarisedinTable1.
Wefocusspecificallyonsupervisedmachinelearning,inwhichlearningcurves
describe the predictive performance of a model produced by a learning algo-
rithmeitherasafunctionofthenumberoftraininginstancesorofthetimeor
iterationsspentforlearningonagivendataset.Weexplicitlyexcludelearning
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
4 Learning Curves for Decision Making
curves that describe the performance of a learning agent in an environment
over time, i.e., the learning curve of an agent in a reinforcement learning
setup (Waltz and Fu, 1965). Similarly, we briefly contrast learning curves to
other performance curves, such as active learning curves, feature curves, and
capacity curves, and explain why we consider these out of scope for the litera-
turereview.Still,weaimtosurveyexhaustivelytheliteraturethatintroduces
approaches that use learning curves in supervised learning.
Contributions:
Our contributions are the following.
•
We present a unified framework of the usage of learning curves for decision
making in machine learning and an extensive review of the literature on
approaches that fall within this framework. This framework contains three
axes, i.e., (i) the type of decision-making situation, see also Fig. 1 (ii) the
type of question that can be answered, see also Fig. 10 and (iii) the data
resources that are used to model the learning curve, see also Fig. 11. While
the first axis of this framework is also used in other literature (see, e.g.,
Viering and Loog, 2023), to the best of our knowledge, the other two axes
have not yet been explicitly identified.
•
Weconducted a literaturesurveyin which we categorise methodspresented
in the literature along the various axes of this framework. Sec. 5 lists all
these methods (where each subsection represents a type of question being
answered), and Table 1 overviews all methods along the three axes of our
framework.
•
Basedontheframework,weidentifyunexploredroutesforfurtherresearch.
Most notably, we note that there is a mismatch between the research ques-
tions being answered and the learning curve modelling method being used;
in many cases, a high-level modelling technique is used to answer a low-
level question. We speculate that matching the level of the question being
answered with the appropriate level of the modelling technique can further
improve the obtained results.
Relation to other literature reviews on learning curves:
Another prominent literature review that centres around learning curves is
the highly complementary work by Viering and Loog (2023), which has been
developed in parallel. While both works have identified the three types of
decision-making situations that are referred to in the literature, Viering and
Loog (2023) survey more theoretical work that analyses the shape of learning
curves,whereasthisworksurveysworkthatismoreorientedtowardsmethods
that extrapolate learning curves, thereby supporting the data scientists in
various decision-making situations.
Structure:
This paper is structured into three main parts. Sec. 2 presents relevant back-
ground knowledge on learning curves, including formal definitions and the
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 5
terminologyrelevantfortheremainder.Sec.3presentsrelevantimportantcon-
ceptsthatrelatetohowlearningcurvesaregenerallymodelled.Sec.4contains
ourmain contribution byintroducing ourframeworkfor categorisingmethods
thatutiliselearningcurvesfordecisionmakinginsupervisedlearning.Follow-
ing this framework, Sec. 5 exhaustively reviews approaches that explicitly or
implicitly answer questions related to learning curves to make or recommend
decisions in the context of supervised machine learning. Sec. 6 concludes our
findings.Finally,AppendixApresentsatablethatoverviewsthemostcritical
notation used throughout this paper.
2 Background on Learning Curves
Thissectiongivesaconceptualbackgroundonlearningcurves.Itfirstprovides
an idealised formal definition in Sec. 2.1 followed by a definition of empirical
learning curves in Sec. 2.2 that can be computed in practice. The concept of
utility curvesisintroducedinSec.2.3.Sec.2.4introducesimportantterminol-
ogysuchasanchorpoints,limitperformance,andthesaturationpoint.Finally,
Sec. 2.5 contrasts the learning curves covered in this survey with other types
of performance curves used in machine learning.
2.1 Sample-Wise and Iteration-Wise Learning Curves
We consider learning curves in the context of supervised machine learning.
Formally, in the supervised learning context, we assume some instance space
and a label space . A dataset d (x,y) x ,y is a finite
X Y ⊂ { | ∈ X ∈ Y}
relation between the instance space and the label space. We denote as the
D
set of all possible datasets. A learning algorithm is a function a : Ω H,
D× →
where H = h h : is the space of hypotheses and Ω is a source of
{ | X → Y}
randomness.
Notethatlearningcurvescanalsobeconsideredinothermachinelearning
setups.Infact,learningcurvesappearedfirstinreinforcementlearning(Waltz
and Fu, 1965) and have also been used for unsupervised learning (Meek et al,
2002). However, to give this survey focus, we consider learning curves for
supervised learning.
The performance of a hypothesis is typically expressed as risk, which is
also often called out-of-sample error:
(cid:90)
(h)= loss(y,h(x))dP . (1)
out
R X×Y
,
X Y
Here, loss(y,h(x)) R is the penalty for predicting h(x) for instance x
when the true labe ∈ l is y , and P is a joint probability measure ∈ o X n
∈ Y X×Y
from which the available dataset d has been generated. As such, the
X ×Y
out-of-sample error represents the weighted summed error that hypothesis h
makes on all possible instance-label pairs, weighted by their probabilities.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
6 Learning Curves for Decision Making
The performance of a learning algorithm is simply the performance of the
hypothesis it produces. In contrast to the performance of a hypothesis, the
performance of a learner depends on its input, i.e., on the data provided for
learning. The average performance of learner a for a number n of training
examples can then be expressed as
(cid:90)
(a,n)= (a(d ,ω))dP dP , (2)
out tr Ω
C R X×Y
ω
∈
Ω,dtr∈D ,
|
dtr| =n
where d is the dataset of size n used to induce a model using learner a.
tr
It is gener ∈ all D y assumed that d is a collection of i.i.d. samples from P .
X×Y
When we consider Eq. (2) as a function of the number of training samples
for a fixed learner a, we obtain the sample-wise curve of learner a. That is,
the sample-wise curve is the function (a, ) : N R; so it is a sequence of
C · →
performances, one for each training size. Fig. 2 (left) visualises this by means
of the green line and compares this to two other types of learning curves with
the error rate as the loss (see Sec. 2.5).
Alternatively, many learning algorithms implement an iterative internal
optimisation process, which allows describing the learning progress over time
or a number of iterations. For example, neural network training produces a
new hypothesis after every batch or epoch, ensemble learners like bagging
or boosting produce a new hypothesis after every added ensemble member,
and support vector machine optimizers yield updated attribute or instance
coeffients in iteration. In the formal framework, a learner can be seen more
generally as a function a : Ω H+ that maps a dataset to a sequence of
D× →
hypotheses,oneforeachofitsiterations.Theaboveerrorfunctionforlearners
can then be written as
(cid:90)
(a,n,t)= (a(d ,ω) )dP dP , (3)
out tr t Ω
C R X×Y
ω
∈
Ω,dtr∈D ,
|
dtr| =n
Here, t expresses some budget, for example, time or a number of iterations
over the dataset, often expressed in epochs.
Basedonthisnotion,theiteration-wise curveofalearnera isdefinedfora
fixed dataset size n (often between 70% and 90% of the available data) and is
thenthefunction (a,n, ):N R.Fig.2(right)visualisesanexampleoftwo
C · →
iteration-wise curves. It can be seen that these iteration-wise curves are also
influenced by the number of samples. The sample-wise curve in this example
(visualised by the dashed line) is assumed to utilise the maximal number of
iterations. Examples of such learning curves occur above all in the analysis of
deep learning models (Domhan et al, 2015; Goodfellow et al, 2016).
The two types of learning curves seem to be related and indeed look simi-
larwhenvisualised,buttheyhavedifferentsemantics.Thecrucialdifferenceis
that iteration-wise curves are usually visualized for a fixed and finite number
of training samples (expressed by n), no matter how large t becomes. In fact,
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 7
sample size
etar
rorre
iterations/time
etar
rorre
Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve
num features
etar
rorre
Feature Curve
model capacity
etar
rorre
Utility Curve Capacity Curve
stream curve
sample-
optimized curve
sample size budget
etar
rorre
iterations/time
etar
rorre
Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve
num features
etar
rorre
Feature Curve
model capacity
etar
rorre
Utility Curve Capacity Curve
stream curve
sample-
optimized curve
budget
Fig. 2: Left: (Standard) sample-wise curve (green) for a single learner on a
particulardatasourcetogetherwithlearningcurvesundersampleoptimisation
(pink) and learning curves on streams (blue). Right: iteration-wise curves of a
singlelearneronaparticulardatasourcefortwodifferentdatasetsizesn <n .
1 2
since iterative learners typically automatically stop the learning process as
soonasnoprogressisobserved,itoftenholdsthat (a,n)=lim (a,n,t).
t
C →∞C
But this is not necessarily the case, specifically if an algorithm stops early
(in the iteration-wise curve), e.g., to avoid over-fitting (as the neural net-
work in Fig. 3). Note that as t grows, each training instance is considered
an unlimited number of times; hence, iteration-wise curves show how much
the learner can make out of a constant number of training instances. Instead,
sample-wise curvesshowtheperformanceofthelearnerasthenumberofexam-
ples grows. The latter typically means, for an infinite input space, that the
information basis available to the learner is growing strictly bigger, while the
information is constant in the case of iteration-wise curves.
Note that while the learning success can be expressed in a metric that
ought to be maximised or minimised, in this paper we assume for simplic-
ity that they are to be minimised. This is why the performance is expressed
throughaloss suchastheerrorrate.Inthiscase,learningcurvesare(usually)
decreasing. However, more generally, one can also be interested in increas-
ing learning curves, e.g., when considering accuracy or the F1 measure. Since
learningcurvescanbesimplymirroredatthex-axis,everyapproachdiscussed
in this paper is applicable to both increasing or decreasing learning curves.
For simplicity, this survey assumes that lower performance values are better
(error rate, log-loss/cross-entropy, Brier score, mean-square-error, etc.).
2.2 Empirical Learning Curves
Theabovedefinitionsoflearningcurvesarepurelytheoretical.Thisisbecause
we cannot evaluate equations (1-3) in practice. First, the out-of-sample error
, i.e., Eq. (1) cannot be computed in practice since the measure P is
out
R X×Y
unknown.Relyingonthiserror,thelearningcurvevaluescannotbecomputed
either. The necessity to average over the oftentimes uncountable set of all
possible train sets can add additional problems.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
8 Learning Curves for Decision Making
0.200
0.175
0.150
0.125
0 1000 2000 3000
Sizenofthetrainingsetdtr
etarrorre
EmpiricalSample-WiseLearningCurves
RF
NN
SVM
0 50 100 150 200 250
Iterationt(trees/epochs/optimizationiterations)
etarrorre
EmpiricalIteration-WiseLearningCurves
RF
NN
SVM
Fig. 3: Empirical learning curves for the waveform dataset. Left:
sample-wise curves at different training set sizes up to 80% of the data. The
remaining 20% are used to compute the error. Right: iteration-wise curves
withoneentryforeachforestsize(RF),epoch(NN),oroptimizationiteration
(SVM) when a fixed set of 80% of the available data is used in each iteration
for training and the rest to compute the error.
To compute learning curves in practice, we rely on empirical estimates of
theabovequantities.Weestimatetheout-of-sampleerrorbytheinternalerror:
1 (cid:88)
(h)= loss(y,h(x)), (4)
in
R d
| |(x,y) d
∈
where d is the dataset used for assessing the performance of hypothesis h.
Note that the dataset d may or may not contain instances used to create the
hypothesis h. In most practical applications, dataset d consists of instances
thathavenotbeenseenduringthecreationofhypothesish(i.e.,thetestset).
However,intheory,theinternalerrorcanalsobeestimatedbasedonthetrain
set d or a combination of instances from the train set and test set.
tr
We consider an empirical learning curve any set of estimates of a true
learning curve for different sizes or iterations. We can use various estima-
tion procedures to estimate the performance using a given training size, such
as using a regular holdout set or cross-validation. The latter leads to vari-
ous estimates, and averaging over these estimates yields an estimate of the
sample-wise curve in Eq. (2) at size n. To obtain an empirical estimate of the
iterative learning curve in Eq. (3), we do the same except that we stop the
learning algorithm after t iterations.
Fig.3showsempiricallearningcurvesforaRandomForest(RF),aNeural
Network(NN)with100neuronsinahiddenlayer,anasupportvectormachine
(SVM)withRBFkernelonaconcreteandwidelyusedbenchmarkdataset(the
waveform dataset). The empirical curves are the scatter points; the lines here
are only a visual aid. The error rate is here obtained from a single validation
fold, i.e., without averaging, which explains the rather unsmooth behavior.
The iteration-wise curves were created using 80% of the data for training.
Sinceempiricallearningcurvesaretheonlywaytogaininsightsabouttrue
learning curves, quite some studies have been published with the sole goal of
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 9
sharing empirical learning curves with the community and thereby improv-
ing the understanding of how they behave. Perlich et al (2003) contrast the
learning curves on decision trees and logistic regression on different datasets.
Notably, the authors also compare learning curves, e.g., they report whether
one curve is below the other (dominates it) on all considered training set sizes
orwhetherthetwolearningcurvescross.Severalotherstudiesreportlearning
curves for specific learners. Ng and Jordan (2001) compare logistic regression
and naive Bayes. Mørch et al (1997) conduct a study similar to the one by
Perlich et al (2003) to compare linear vs. non-linear classifiers on a smaller
scale. Recently, a number of learning curve databases have been published,
i.e., learning curves of different network architectures on typical image classi-
fication datasets (Bornschein et al, 2020; Dong and Yang, 2020; Siems et al,
2020),learningcurvesofdifferentmachinelearningalgorithmsontabulardata
(Mohr et al, 2022), and for mixtures of these tasks (Eggensperger et al, 2021;
Pfisterer et al, 2022).
Empirical studies of this type do not answer generalising questions about
learning curves but rather report experimental results. This is different from
contributions in which certain model assumptions are made and data is com-
pared to those models, e.g., with the aim to compute the goodness of fit of
that model. In Sec. 3, we briefly discuss some of such models.
2.3 Utility Curves
The concept of learning curves can be further generalised to a utility
curve (Last, 2007, 2009; Weiss and Tian, 2008). The utility usually involves
a trade-off between the performance and the computational cost of training a
model. The specific details can be different per task. The utility is connected
to the learning curve in so far as the utility is also a function of the budget
and is directly influenced by the predictive performance. Therefore, one could
argue that the utility curve is obtained by passing the learning curve to
U
the utility function alongside other parameters that influence the utility, most
notably the cost of acquiring new instances and the cost to train a model on
the respective dataset size. The learning curves associated with utility costs
are visualised in Fig. 4 (orange) and compared to a normal learning curve.
Assuming there is a linear cost associated with further training the classifier,
wecanseethattheutilitycurve(whichmakesatrade-offbetweenperformance
and cost) peaks at a given point, and deteriorates afterwards.
2.4 Terminology of Learning Curves
While this survey is not primarily about the shapes of learning curves, the
shapesoflearningcurvesplayanimportantrolewhenusingthemtomakedeci-
sions. Hence, we consider it necessary to convey some of the most important
insightsaboutthebasicsoftheshapesoflearningcurves.However,wereferto
arecentexhaustivesurveyontheshapesoflearningcurves(VieringandLoog,
2023) for details on this topic. Fig. 5 visualises some important concepts.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
10 Learning Curves for Decision Making
sample size
etar
rorre
iterations/time
etar
rorre
Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve
num features
etar
rorre
Feature Curve
model capacity
etar
rorre
Utility Curve Capacity Curve
stream curve
sample-
optimized curve
budget
Fig. 4: A utility curve with the corresponding learning curve.
Anchor Points
In this survey, we adopt the term anchor to refer to a point for which the
empiricallearningcurvecarriesaperformanceestimate.Thereisnoestablished
name for such points in literature. They are called sample sizes in (John and
Langley,1996;LeiteandBrazdil,2007;Provostetal,1999),andthoseauthors
refer to a collection of such samples sizes as a schedule (Figueroa et al, 2012;
John and Langley, 1996; Meek et al, 2002; Provost et al, 1999). However, for
iteration-wise curves, the term ‘sample’ is misleading because the curve plots
performance against the number of times all instances (out of a fixed set) are
presentedtothelearner,whichisnotthesameassamplesize.Besides,theterm
samplesizeisquiteoverloadedinthecontextofmachinelearning,becausethis
field deals with various types of samples in different contexts, e.g., train and
validation samples, etc. Another terminology observed sometimes is the one
of sample landmarks (Fu¨rnkranz and Petrak, 2001; Leite and Brazdil, 2005).
However, this term is also slightly confusing, since landmarks are generally
understood as the performances of cheap-to-evaluate learners, which was also
the motivation for this terminology by Fu¨rnkranz and Petrak (2001). A less
used terminology is the term anchor (Kielh¨ofer et al, 2024; Kolachina et al,
2012;MohrandvanRijn,2021,2023),whichisnotambiguousinthemachine
learning context and captures the idea that analysis is based on some selected
points. It serves well to immediately create an association with a particular
size of a sampled training data set or a number of visited instances that is
used in the context of building an empirical learning curve.
Throughout this paper, we formally use the symbol b to refer to an
anchor.Thereby,weabstractawayfromsamplesizesn oriterationt.Inother
words, the symbol b is used to indicate points on both sample-wise curves or
iteration-wise curves, and it should be clear from the context which one is
meant (if the difference is relevant).
For example, in Fig. 3 above, we have the following anchors. For the
sample-wise curve, a geometric schedule with n 2i/2 i N is cho-
∈ {⌈ ⌉ | ∈ }
sen. In this concrete case, the anchors are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 23, 32,
{
46, 64, 91, 128, 182, 256, 363, 512, 725, 1024, 1449, 2048, 2897, 3750 . In the
}
iteration-wise curve, every iteration is used as an anchor, so t 1,..,200 .
∈{ }
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 11
0.28
0.26
0.24
0.22
0.20
0.18
trainsetsize d ornumberofiterationst
| tr|
etaRrorrE
LearningCurve( )
C
ObservationsofanEmpiricalLCatanchors
LimitPerformance
SaturationPoint/Performance(b /p )
sat sat
Pre-ExponentialPoint/Performance
Fig. 5: Concepts related to a learning curve. Red: Limit performance. Green:
Saturation point b (vertical line) and saturation performance p (hori-
sat sat
zontal line). Orange: Pre-exponential point (vertical line) and pre-exponential
performance(horizontalline).Thecurveplateausataperformanceof0.2;the
plateau is not visualized here to emphasise the difference between the pre-
exponential point and saturation point.
Limit Performance
It is generally assumed that learning curves converge to some value. In the
case of iterative learning curves, there are sometimes oscillations in the curve,
but even in such cases, the curve usually converges to some (in those cases,
typically a bad) value eventually. We are not aware of a particular term that
is used to describe the score to which a learner converges. Cortes et al (1994)
describesthelimiting performance ortheasymptotic performance ofthedata;
i.e.,itisnotthepropertyofaparticularlearnerbutthebestachievableperfor-
mance among all learners under consideration (even though only tested with
two model types in the paper). In this paper, we adopt the term limit perfor-
mance of the learner (on a fixed number of training instances in the case of
iteration-wise curves), and we denote this performance as p .
lim
Saturation Point
Intuitively, the saturation point is the anchor after which the performance
convergences.Thatis,theanchorafterwhichallvaluesareinadistanceofless
thansomepre-definedandtypicallyverysmallε.Inearlyworks,thispointhas
beencalledstopping point (Figueroaetal,2012;LeiteandBrazdil,2003,2004;
Meek et al, 2002; Provost et al, 1999). Provost et al (1999) characterise this
pointasfollow:“Modelsbuiltwithsmallertrainingsets[thans ]havelower
min
accuracy than models built with from training sets of size s , and models
min
built with larger training sets have no higher accuracy.” In the context of
thoseworks,namelyprogressivesampling,thetermstoppingpointmakessense
becausetheyprogressivelysampleuntiltheyreachtheconvergenceregion,and
then stop the sampling procedure. In the absence of such a mechanism, the
term appears a bit odd. The notion of saturation in the context of learning
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
12 Learning Curves for Decision Making
curveswasproposedbyTomanek(2010)andseemsappropriatesincethelimit
performance has not been reached, but it has almost been reached. The curve
is saturated up to a mistake of ε.
We will denote the saturation point itself as b , emphasising that the
sat
saturation point is an anchor. The saturation performance is simply the value
of the learning curve at that point. Both are defined in the context of a fixed
learnera.Hence,wecanwritethesaturationperformanceasp := (a,b )
sat sat
C
in the context of a sample-wise curve or p := (a,n,b ) in the context of
sat sat
C
an iteration-wise curve.
Pre-Exponential Point
A related concept is the pre-exponential point and, correspondingly, the pre-
exponential performance. The saturation point may be expensive to reach
in the sense that a lot of training data is necessary to obtain the satura-
tion performance. We call the smallest anchor point for which an increase by
a factor of q leads to a performance improvement of less than some δ, i.e.,
(a,n) (a,q n) < δ. Reasonable candidates for q can be 2 or 10, while
C −C ·
candidates for δ can be 0.01 or 0.001 if the metric is the error rate. Its seman-
tic is that from the pre-exponential point on, one needs more than qk (i.e., an
exponentially increasing number of) training samples or iterations to improve
by a low margin of kδ. Correspondingly, the pre-exponential performance is
the performance that can be obtained by a comparably small anchor point.
Utility-Based Stopping Point
The utility-based stopping point is the point at which the acquisition of fur-
ther data points has a negative impact on the utility of the data analysing
entity. Therefore, this concept is associated with utility curves. The utility-
basedstoppingpointisnotrelatedtothesaturationpointbut,ifatall,rather
to the pre-exponential point; we denote it as bu . In Fig. 4, this is the peak of
sat
the yellow curve.
Plateau
The right-sided open interval bounded by the saturation point from the left
is consistently called the plateau of the curve. However, a curve can also have
intermediate plateaus,i.e.,intervalsof(almost)constantperformancewithout
being the final plateau.
Well-behaved Learning Curves
To our knowledge, the notion of a well-behaved learning curve is first used by
Provost et al (1999). A learning curve is said to be well behaved if its slope
is monotonically non-decreasing (for error-based learning curves). An even
stricter criterion demanding convexity of the curve, which implies monotonic-
ity, has been introduced recently by Mohr and van Rijn (2021, 2023). The
property of being well behaved is one of the true learning curve. The (linear
interpolation of an) empirical learning curve can often violate this condition,
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 13
specifically when the number of validations conducted at the anchors is small
or when the learning curve has reached a plateau.
While it is known that not all learning curves are well behaved (Loog and
Duin, 2012; Loog et al, 2019), empirical studies suggest that such curves are
ratheranexceptionandthatmostsample-wise curvesarewellbehaved.Learn-
ing curves that are not well behaved are found above all in the context of
deeplearning,whereadouble descent orpeaking phenomenoncanbeobserved
(at times) for both sample-wise curves and iteration-wise curves (Nakkiran
et al, 2020); the effect was also observed decades ago for other learners (Val-
let et al, 1989). However, extensive empirical studies have shown that most
sample-wise curvesareevenconvex (MohrandvanRijn,2023)andhencewell
behaved. Some recent works suggest that potential ill behaviour can be mit-
igated by appropriate configuration or wrapping of learners (Mhammedi and
Husain, 2021; Nakkiran et al, 2021; Viering et al, 2020).
2.5 Relation to Other Types of Performance Curves
We briefly discuss the relation of learning curves to other types of curves
and problem settings. These curves are fundamentally different from learning
curves, and therefore, a more detailed coverage is beyond our scope.
2.5.1 Learning Curves in Active Learning
Active learning is a setting where the data scientist can acquire the label of
arbitraryinstances(Settles,2009)andhencecanactivelyincreasethetraining
set. On a concrete data source with a concrete initial dataset, a specific active
learningstrategycreatesadeterministically extendeddatasetforanyarbitrary
anchor. While this allows drawing a curve that plots performance against the
number of training instances, this curve is not the one described in Eq. (2),
because the datasets are not sampled i.i.d. from but dictated by the
PX×Y
active learning strategy; they are sample-optimised. Fig. 2 displays how this
theoretically relates to the normal sample-wise curve. We do not consider this
type of learning curve in this survey.
2.5.2 Learning Curves under Optimal Class Distribution
Similarly,weobtainsuchabiasedlearningcurveifwedonotpreservetheclass
distribution.WeissandProvost(2003)haveshownthatitcanbeadvantageous
to over-sample instances of a minority class if they occur substantially more
seldom than instances of a majority class. One can then ask for the best class
distributionforacertainanchor.Similartotheactivelearningcase,thiscreates
a new distribution of datasets that does not coincide with P anymore. If
X×Y
we optimise over the class distribution at each anchor, we obtain a curve with
thesameaxislabelsasasample-wise curvebutadifferentsemantics(andmost
likely different values). For the case of two classes, this type of learning curve
is obtained by taking the budget-wise maximum of a performance surface as
proposed by Forman and Cohen (2004).
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
14 Learning Curves for Decision Making
sample size
etar
rorre
iterations/time
etar
rorre
Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve
num features
etar
rorre
Feature Curve
model capacity
etar
rorre
Utility Curve Capacity Curve
stream curve
sample-
optimized curve
budget
Fig. 6: Feature curve example for a single learner, once for a fixed and finite
dataset size and once for an infinite dataset size.
2.5.3 Learning Curves on Data Streams
Another type of learning curve that violates the implicit assumptions made
in Eq. (2) is obtained when learning from data streams, a scenario in which
training instances are coming in sequentially and need to be processed under
stricttimeandmemoryconstraints(Bifetetal,2018).Incrementallearnerslike
Hoeffdingtrees(DomingosandHulten,2000)andmodelsinducedbystochastic
gradient descent are natural solutions to this problem domain. When applied
toadatastream,thesealgorithmsexplicitlyforget aninstanceonceithasbeen
processed. This is not only to free memory but also to address the problem of
concept drift,i.e.,thefactthatP changesovertime.Insuchacase,wedo
X×Y
nothavethat (a,n)=lim (a,n,t)butratherthat (a,n)= (a,n,n),
t
C →∞C C C
where the learner is updated at every incoming training instance, and each of
the n instances was considered exactly once; for example, similar to training
a neural network for one epoch with batch size 1. While this produces a kind
of sample-wise curve, the result is clearly different from the learning curve
received in the normal batch setting. Fig. 2 displays how these type of curves
theoretically relate to the normal sample-wise curves.
Even though syntactically equivalent to a sample-wise curve, data stream
learning curves are substantially different and need different treatment. Due
to the (potential) concept drift over the time dimension, the i.i.d. assumption
isnotguaranteed(daCostaetal,2016).Fromatheoreticalviewpoint,extrap-
olating the learning curve over time to meaningfully predict future behaviour
becomes impossible without the i.i.d. assumption. Due to its special nature,
the data stream setting is beyond our scope.
2.5.4 Feature Curves
Learning curves always consider a fixed number of features. Instead, one can
fixthenumberoftraininginstancesandconsidertheperformanceasafunction
of the number of features. This yields so-called feature curves (Hughes, 1968;
Viering and Loog, 2023).
Defining meaningful feature curves is conceptually more difficult than
learning curves because of the importance that single features can have. For
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 15
simplicity,consideronlysample-wise curvesforthiscomparison.Insuchlearn-
ing curves, every point n is associated with the expected performance when
usingn traininginstances.Thesen traininginstancesareassumedtobedrawn
independently and identically distributed from the underlying distribution.
Accordingtotheaforementioneddefinitionsofalearningcurve(perEq.2and
Eq. 3), there is no notion of a more informative instance (even though this
notion clearly exists in the field of active learning). In particular, the order in
which instances are drawn is irrelevant. However, in the context of features,
some features are often more informative than others (and again, other fea-
turesthathavenotbeenmeasuredmaybeevenmoreinformative).Therefore,
inordertogetanadequateoverview,featurecurvesrequiresomekindofaver-
aging over all possible sets of features of a fixed size that can be formed from
a base set of (available) features, as done by Hughes (1968). The fact that
some features might be more important than other features makes it hard to
modelandextrapolatefeaturecurves,asthereisnoreasonablesetofassump-
tions to build these models on. Fig. 6 displays two theoretical examples of
feature curves. When having a finite number of samples, the performance of
these curves will, in the limit (when more features are added), deteriorate due
to the curse of dimensionality. Of course, when having infinite samples, the
performance of such feature curves will go to perfect performance.
Note that feature curves and learning curves can be integrated. For exam-
ple, Strang et al (2018) look at the combination of the number of instances
and the number of features. Since the effect of the number of features and the
number of instances on the overall performance is clearly not independent,
considering both together is sensible. At the same time, due to the ambigu-
ous semantics of feature curves already discussed above, using such combined
curves is not necessarily straightforward for decision making, and we are not
aware that the combined curve has been used for decision making so far.
2.5.5 Capacity Curves
Cortes et al (1994) introduce a curve that plots the performance of a config-
urablelearnerasafunctionofthecomplexityofitsinstantiation.Forexample,
the learner could be a neural network, and the complexity would then be the
numberofhiddenlayers.Indoingthis,afixeddatasetsizeisassumed.Inthat
paper,thistypeofcurvehasnospecificname,butwedubitthecapacitycurve
because they plot the performance as a function of capacity. Fig. 7 displays
examples of capacity curves.
Capacity curves are interesting from a theoretical viewpoint as they allow
ustoanalysetheintrinsicnoiselevelofthegivendata.Moreprecisely,onecan
ask for the performance of a learner of some complexity level on, perhaps, an
infinite number of data points. If this value can be computed for every com-
plexity level, then we obtain a performance curve over the model complexity.
If the number of data points is large enough, this curve can be assumed to be
monotonically decreasing. If we have a maximally flexible learner (such as a
neural network) that can, in principle, assimilate any function, then the curve
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
16 Learning Curves for Decision Making
sample size
etar
rorre
iterations/time
etar
rorre
Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve
num features
etar
rorre
Feature Curve
model capacity
etar
rorre
Utility Curve Capacity Curve
stream curve
sample-
optimized curve
budget
Fig. 7: Capacity curve example for a learner class whose complexity can be
increased (e.g., a neural network), once for a fixed and finite dataset size and
once for the theoretical case of an infinite dataset size.
will converge towards the intrinsic noise of the data. That is, no learner can
improve over that performance.
2.5.6 Curriculum Learning
Curriculumlearningisaparadigminspiredbyhumanlearningstrategies,par-
ticularlyhowhumanslearncomplextasksbygraduallyincreasingthedifficulty
of the examples they are exposed to (Wang et al, 2022).
Incurriculumlearning,insteadofrandomlypresentingtraininginstancesto
themodel,instancesarepresentedinameaningfulorder,typicallyfromsimpler
tomorecomplexsetsoftraininginstances.Thiscanhelpthemodellearnmore
effectivelyandconvergefasterbyinitiallyfocusingoneasierinstancesthatare
simpler to learn and gradually introducing more difficult instances.
Learningcurvesrelatedtocurriculumlearningcomewithallsortsofnovel
challenges, such as interpreting the learning curve in case more complex test
instances are provided. Therefore, it is hard to make assumptions about what
a well-behaved curriculum learning curve would look like. For this reason, we
consider curriculum learning to be out of scope.
3 Modelling a Learning Curve
Alearningcurvemodel isacharacterisationofthetrue learningcurvederived
from an empirical learning curve. The empirical learning curve is the result
of sampling from a stochastic process that underlies noise stemming from
randomness in data splits and the learning algorithm itself. It is typically
assumed(Domhanetal,2015;Figueroaetal,2012;Kleinetal,2017a,b;Mohr
andvanRijn,2023;Swerskyetal,2014)that,foranylearnera andanybudget
b N, this stochastic process follows the distribution
∈
f(a,b) (µ ,σ2 )=µ + (0,σ2 ), (5)
∼N a,b a,b a,b N a,b
where µ is either (a,b) as per Eq. (2) if modelling a sample-wise curve or
a,b
C
(a,n,b) for some (implicit and not further specified) training set size n as
C
per Eq. (3) when modelling an iteration-wise curve. It assumes a noise that
follows a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and dispersion σ2 that may
a,b
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 17
vary over different anchor sizes. The assumption of a Gaussian noise is rea-
sonable, because most loss functions form an average over sample-wise scores,
which implies a Gaussian distribution through the Central Limit Theorem.
Forsimplicity,wewillnotmakeadifferencebetweenthetwotypesoflearning
curves,sothatanchorsarealwaysdenotedasbudgetsb (regardlessofwhether
this refers to training set size or iterations, epochs, trees, etc.).
The task of forming a learning curve model for one or multiple learners
is inherently one of supervised machine learning and requires the ability to
generaliseacrossanchors(andpossiblyevenlearners).Inpractice,observations
are only available for a finite number of learner-anchor combinations O =
(a ,b ),(a ,b ),(a ,b ),... , and the task is to learn, for each learner a, a
1 1 2 2 3 3
{ }
modelˆf (b) that expresses the belief about f(a,b) for any budget b, not only
a
those in O. Therefore, it is not enough to simply create an explicit estimate
of µ for the anchors (a,b ) O, but some general pattern must be learned.
a,bi i
∈
Observe that a here is not a parameter of ˆf (b) since one often does not
a
generalise across learners. However, some approaches advocate a single model
ˆf(a,b) that estimates µ for any learner-budget combination, where a A
a,b
∈
and A is the set of all possible learners (Klein et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al,
2014).
Duringthisprocessofbuildingalearningcurvemodel,onegenerallyneeds
to cope with two types of uncertainty. First, the aleatoric uncertainty is σ2 ,
a,b
whichisintrinsicandaveragedoutinthetruelearningcurve.Again,thisisthe
uncertainty arising from randomness in the learner itself (if applicable) and
randomeffectsinthesplits(ormoregeneral:datacollection)whencomputing
the empirical learning curve. Second, the epistemic uncertainty is the one the
learningcurvemodelitself hasabouttheestimateofthemeanvalueµ .This
a,b
uncertainty can be removed by gathering more observations (i.e., extending
observation set O).
It is important to understand that epistemic uncertainty generally does
notindicatemodelquality.Epistemicuncertaintyisnotrelatedtocorrectness:
A model can have no epistemic uncertainty (be absolutely sure) about an
actuallywrongprediction,andsimilarly,itcanbeuncertainaboutaprediction
that is actually correct. Also, epistemic uncertainty gives no indication about
whethertheclass fromwhichthepredictivemodelisinferredissuitableforthe
task, i.e., whether the true curve can be captured by the model that is fitted
(e.g., a power law). Hu¨llermeier and Waegeman (2021) discuss this for the
more general case of selecting an appropriate machine learning model. Recent
resultssuggestthatmanylearningcurvesarenotadequatelycapturedevenby
a very flexible parametric model, i.e., the 4-parameter MMF model (Kielh¨ofer
et al, 2024), which motivates other, possibly non-parametric approaches for
modelling,suchastheoneusedinfreeze-thawBayesianoptimisation(Swersky
et al, 2014). Therefore, the uncertainty at the meta-level about whether a
model class is suitable for a task cannot be captured in epistemic uncertainty
and must be studied independently.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
18 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Modellinguncertaintyinlearningcurvemodelstypicallyimpliesmodelling
theepistemicuncertainty aboutthecurvemeanµ .Thisuncertaintyrefersto
a,b
arbitrary anchorsb,boththosefromtheobserveddataO aswellastheanchors
that were not part of this. The three common patterns to define beliefs about
µ are (i) point estimates (no uncertainty is expressed), (ii) range estimates,
a,b
e.g.,confidenceintervalsforµ ,or(iii)distributionestimates,whichquantify
a,b
a full belief model over the true value of µ . The aleatoric uncertainty can
a,b
also be quantified and modelled, e.g., by taking many different samples per
anchor.
Fig. 8 illustrates all of these concepts together. The blue line µ repre-
a,
·
sents the true learning curve as per Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 for all possible values of b.
As this integrates out all possible data splits as well as random factors from
the algorithm, each point is an average from a distribution of many possi-
ble performance values. The variance of this distribution is expressed as σ2 .
a,
This variance stems from the aleatoric uncertainty, in the sense that it is hig·h
when the aleatoric uncertainty is high, and vice versa. As the budget b (rep-
resentedonthex-axis)increases,thealeatoricuncertaintytypicallydecreases,
and thereby the variance naturally decreases as well. The orange elements are
related to observations of the learners’ performance and the learning curve
model.Theorangepoints(whichalltogetherformO)showobservationsmade
on the empirical learning curve (as a sample from the blue distributions, this
canbeoneormoreperpoint).Notethatthesedonotnecessarilyneedtoalign
with µ or fall within the variance bandwidth. The orange solid line shows a
a,
·
point estimate defined by a parametric model obtained from the observations,
andinthisexample,itsubstantiallydeviatesfromthetruecurve(cf.Sec.3.1).
The orange shaded area is a range estimate modelling epistemic uncertainty,
which grows as one moves away from the available data (cf. Sec. 3.2). Finally,
the dashed orange lines are distribution estimates for different budgets b (cf.
Sec.3.3).Eachofthesedashedlinescanbeseenasaprobabilitydensityfunc-
tion(rotated90degrees)foracertainbudgetb.Eachcurveshownsketchesthe
distribution of the belief about where the true mean may be situated, in this
figure modelled through Gaussian distributions. As we move away from the
observations,theshapeofthesebellsgrowsbigger,indicatinghigherepistemic
uncertainty.
In the following sections, we will explain the three model types in more
depth. We explain the concept for models of the type ˆf (b), i.e., models for a
a
specific learner a, because this is the most common case. Generalising a curve
model across learners requires additional logic, which we discuss along with
the models that utilise such generalised model in Sec. 5.2.3.
3.1 Point Estimates of the Learning Curve
The simplest type of learning curve model for a learner a just estimates the
mean curve values µ for any possible budget b and ignores uncertainty
a,b
aspects (solid orange line in Fig. 8). Given an empirical learning curve in
the form of some finite samples from this process at different anchors B =
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 19
µ fˆ (PointEstimate)
a, a
·
σ2 fˆ (RangeEstimate)
a, a
·
Observations fˆ (DistributionEstimate)
a
Fig. 8: Visualisation of various forms of uncertainty in learning curve mod-
elling. The blue line µ represents the true learning curve; the dot means
a,
· ·
that it is for all budgets b. The variance over all possible curves that could
be sampled is expressed as σ2 . The variance stems from the aleatoric uncer-
a,
tainty. Orange points are anch·ors at which a learner’s performance has been
observed. From this, an empirical learning curve can be modelled. The orange
solid line, area, and dashed lines are point estimate, range estimate, and dis-
tribution estimate models, respectively. The latter two models also express
epistemic uncertainty.
b ,..,b , a regression model ˆf ( θ):N R is trained with respect to some
1 n a
{ } ·| →
model class with parameters θ. A considerable number of different parametric
modelshavebeenproposedovertimeforthistask.Toourknowledge,thefirst
proposal of such classes was made, apparently independently, by Cortes et al
(1993) and John and Langley (1996) with the three-parametric inverse power
law (IPL)
µ =α+βb γ, (6)
a,b −
wheretheparametersα,β,γ >0needtobeoptimisedtofitthelearningcurve
for learner a. Frey and Fisher (1999) took a simplified variant of that model
(αb β) and compared it to a logarithmic (αlogb +β), and an exponential
−
model(α 10 βb).Whileithasbeenargued,atleastforthepower-lawfamily,
−
·
that there is a theoretical foundation for it (Seung et al, 1992), the considered
model classes are typically not theoretically motivated but rather pop up in
an ad-hoc manner. For example, Gu et al (2001) extended the above three
classes,withoutaspecificmotivation,byavaporpressuremodel,theMorgan-
Mercer-Flodin (MMF) model, and a Weibull model.
Depending on the purpose of the model, it is essential to distinguish
between best-fitting and best-predictive models. As was pointed out by Gu
et al (2001), the model class that can best accommodate a given set of anchor
points is not always the one that will make the best predictions on a high
anchor when having been fit only on some initial anchors. To understand the
learningcurveofalearneronagivendataset,oneisinterestedinabest-fitting
model class. For extrapolation, one is interested in a best-predictive one.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
20 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Our work does not seek to give a broad overview of different model classes
but rather about the usage of such models. We expose the inverse power law
model because it is arguably the most prominent model class and has been
advocated by many authors as a good fit for nearest neighbours, SVMs, deci-
sion trees, and neural networks (Frey and Fisher, 1999; Gu et al, 2001; Hess
and Wei, 2010; Richter and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). However, other models have
been proposed, e.g., based on differential equations (Boonyanunta and Zeep-
hongsekul, 2004) or other physical laws (Gu et al, 2001), and authors have
argued that other models, such as logarithmic shape can be a better fit (Gu
et al, 2001; Singh, 2005). For an updated and exhaustive overview of used
model classes, we refer to the work by Viering and Loog (2023).
3.2 Range Estimates of the Learning Curves
It has been recognised that incorporating some notion of uncertainty into the
model itself is important (Mukherjee et al, 2003). Formally, this amounts to
learn a range estimate function ˆf : N R2 such that ˆf (b) [u,v] with
a a
→ ≡
some pre-defined semantic relationship between µ and the interval [u,v]. In
a,b
Fig. 8, this type of estimate is visualised through the orange area.
The semantics of the interval [u,v] depend on what exactly is being mod-
elled, which also implies how the model is created. In the earliest known
attemptonthismatter, Mukherjeeetal(2003)modelthe(believed)interquar-
tile range of the actual distribution f(a,b) with this interval, i.e., values that
areexpectedtobeobservedwithacertainprobabilityifsamplingataspecific
anchor (aleatoric uncertainty). In this approach, two parametric (i.e., inverse
power law) models are built, one from the 25 and one from the 75 quantile
for each observed anchor b. Even though the mean does not necessarily lie
between these quartiles in general, this is the case in a Gaussian distribution,
whichisasensibleassumptionasexplainedabove.Incontrast, Figueroaetal
(2012) use it to model a confidence interval of µ (epistemic uncertainty).
a,b
In this specific case, only one parametric model is learned, and the confidence
intervalaroundthecurveisobtainedthroughanalyticalratherthanstochastic
techniques. The confidence interval-based approach can also be thought of as
putting a probabilistic bound on the gap between the predicted performance
ˆf (b) and the true value µ .
a a,b
Again, the mere presence of interval-based predictions that express epis-
temic uncertainty should not lead to the conclusion or belief that there is a
necessary relationship to correctness. In particular, an epistemic uncertainty
of0doesnotimplyacorrectprediction.Supposethemodelˆf ischosenfroma
a
classofwhichthemeancurveµ isnotamember.Inthatcase,itisguaranteed
a,
·
that there will be wrong predictions, regardless of the epistemic uncertainty
expressed by the model. But even if µ is among the models from which ˆf
a, a
·
can be built, it can still (and usually will) happen that, based on insufficient
observations, a wrong ˆf will be picked. In such a case, it is still conceivable
a
that, depending on the probabilistic model on which ˆf rests, the epistemic
a
uncertaintywouldbe0foranchorsb whereasf(a,b)=ˆf (b);hereˆf (b)isjust
a a
̸
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 21
a value since the epistemic uncertainty of 0 means that the interval ˆf (b) has
a
only one value.
3.3 Distribution Estimates of Learning Curves
In a more ambitious case, we can try to learn a full belief model of the learn-
ing curve . Formally, this amounts to learn a distribution estimate function
ˆf : N C p p is a distribution in the domain of the performance measure .
a
→ { | }
Fig. 8, this model corresponds to the sequence of dashed orange distributions
(in this figure, displayed for only 14 values of budget b).
As with the previous approaches, one typically uses parametric functions
(e.g., the inverse power law) as a basis but specifies distributions over their
parameters insteadofasingle(basedonthemaximumlikelihood)assignment.
The distribution over parameters then induces a distribution of the space of
learningcurves.Suchabeliefmodelis,forexample,well-definedinaBayesian
frameworkthatdefinestheposteriordistributionofmodelsgiventheobserved
data and assumes a certain model class. This posterior distribution cannot be
efficiently computed exactly but approximate it through sampling (Domhan
et al, 2015; Klein et al, 2017b).
Clearly,distributionestimatesarethemostflexiblewayofmodellinguncer-
tainty and allow many interesting operations. In particular, one can quantify
the probability that the limit performance of a learning curve will be above
or below some threshold τ, which is very useful for confidence-based early
discarding (Domhan et al, 2015).
4 A Framework to Categorise Learning Curves
Methods for Decision Making
Based on the common ground of learning curves and their models introduced
inSec.2andSec.3,thissectionpresentsaframeworkforcategorising decision-
makingmethodsthatuselearningcurves.Weidentifythreeorthogonalcriteria
along which those approaches can be categorised. The first criterion relates to
the decision-making situation in which learning curves are used. We discuss
these situations exhaustively in Sec. 4.1. The second dimension covers the
technical question that is answered about a learning curve to support the
decision. For example, are we interested in the saturation point or a complete
model? These technical questions are sketched in Sec. 4.2, and we structure
the literature review of Sec. 5 according to this axis. Finally, different data
resources can be used to conduct an analysis with learning curves, e.g., other
learning curves or features describing the datasets or the learning algorithms.
These resources are covered in Sec. 4.3.
4.1 Types of Decision-making Situations
Learning curves are an important resource in at least three types of decision-
making situations:
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
22 Learning Curves for Decision Making
1. Quantitative Data Acquisition Consider the situation where a data sci-
entist has a model trained on a set of observations, the performance is
known,andthereistheoptiontospendadditionalresources(e.g.,money
orlabellingeffort)toobtainadditionaltrainingobservations.Thedecision
thatneedstobemadeis:Theacquisitionofhowmanymorelabelsiseco-
nomicallyreasonable?Thisquestionhasanobviousconnectiontothefield
ofactive learning,whichaddressesthequestionofwhich instancesshould
belabellednext(qualitativeacquisition).Anotherquestioniswhetherwe
should acquire other features instead.
2. Early Stopping (of training an independently considered model). In the
situation where one is committed to some specific learner (a learning
algorithm and its hyperparameters), minimising the training effort is a
reasonable goal. Specifically, if large amounts of data are available and
trainingiscostly,theaimistotrainuntilthesaturationpointisreached.
Beingabletodetectorpredictwhetheralearner’sperformancesaturates
after a given number of observations or iterations can support making
decisions on this.
3. Early Discarding (inmodelselection).Similarly,ifwewanttoselect from
various models, we want to stop the evaluation of a candidate when we
are sure that it is not competitive to the current best solution. We com-
pare the learner performance to that of another learner instead of its
ownperformanceonmoretraininginvestment.Forexample,considerthe
situation where the learning curve of an algorithm seems to approach
the saturation point, and we have already seen a superior model before,
of which it is unlikely that the current algorithm will improve over. In
this case, we can discard the performance of this learner based on the
performance in relation to other models.
There is a large methodological overlap in creating a decision basis among
all these decision-making situations. For example, whether more data points
would be helpful to improve performance is related to the question of the
trainingsizethatshouldbechosentominimisetrainingeffort.Bothquestions,
at their core, ask for the saturation point of the learning curve.
In the following sections, we will discuss each of the three decision-making
situations in more depth.
4.1.1 Quantitative Data Acquisition
Quantitative data acquisition focuses on the question of how many training
examples should be considered, given that they are all sampled i.i.d. from the
same source. Quantitative data acquisition does not consider or pay attention
to the possibility of acquiring specific instances, which would be considered in
qualitative data acquisition. Qualitative data acquisition is mainly studied in
the field of active learning and does not ask whether or how many instances
should be acquired but for which instances a label should be acquired. Since
active learning undermines the i.i.d. assumption, it generates a different type
of learning curve and is not covered in this survey.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 23
Therelevanceoflearningcurvesforquantitativedataacquisitionrisesfrom
their ability to give insights into intrinsic properties of the data source as
wellasintotherelationshipbetweenthenumberoftrainingexamplesandthe
utility ofhavingthatnumberofsamples.Ontheonehand,intrinsicproperties
refertotheintrinsicnoiseofthedata(Cortesetal,1994),whichtellsusabout
the best possible performance of any learner no matter how much data would
be available from the source. If we know that, with the given data, we already
achieveaperformanceclosetotheintrinsicnoise,thendataacquisitionshould
focus on acquiring additional features instead of new instances. On the other
hand, the utility is mainly determined by the cost of acquiring (additional)
examples,theperformanceobtainedwithacertainnumberofsamples,andthe
costtotrainamodelwithagivennumberofinstances(Last,2007,2009;Weiss
andTian,2008).Inthiseconomiccontext,therearemainlyfivequestionsthat
can be considered:
1. Possibility.Cantheclassificationperformancebeimprovedbymoredata?
2. Potential. What is the best possible predictive performance given unlim-
ited training observations?
3. Maximization Principle.Byhowmuchcanthepredictiveperformancebe
improvedifthereisabudgetforafixednumberofadditionaldatapoints?
4. Minimization Principle. How many instances are necessary to obtain a
certain degree of predictive performance?
5. Utility maximization. Which sample size maximises a given utility func-
tion?
In the context of data acquisition, we typically deal with sample-wise curves.
Furthermore,oneisoftennotcommittedtoaparticularlearner;therefore,the
performance measure in the above questions is implicitly the best one of a
portfolio of learners. That is, one assumes a set of learners that is considered
admissibleforthepredictiontaskduetoexternalrestrictions.Ingeneral,dueto
the ability to parameterise learners, this set is usually infinite. When referring
totheportfolio’sperformanceataspecificanchorpoint,weareinterestedinits
best-performing algorithm at that specific point at the learning curve (Mohr
and van Rijn, 2023). Of course, if one is committed to one particular learner,
then the situation simplifies to a portfolio of size 1.
Since data acquisition is not for free, it is sensible to relate potential pre-
dictive performance improvements with the costs to collect the additional
labels. Therefore, instead of looking only at predictive performance, one looks
at utility of an anchor point. While performance typically only improves with
an increased number of observations, the utility also considers acquisition
costs, which negatively affect the utility. Therefore, the goal is to decide how
many instances should be labelled to maximise utility, i.e., how many addi-
tional instances are justified before the added value no longer outweighs the
additional costs (Last, 2007; Weiss and Tian, 2008).
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
24 Learning Curves for Decision Making
4.1.2 Early Stopping
Earlystoppingmeansinterruptingthetrainingprocessofalearnerifthelearn-
ing curve has converged. The term ‘early’ refers to the fact that the learning
process would normally be continued, e.g., because more data is available or
other stopping criteria are not yet satisfied. That is, one uses the learning
curve to judge that, despite more available resources or other criteria that
would encourage further training, investing more time will not improve the
performance of the considered model class any further. The training process
canthenbestoppedearly,i.e.,earlierthanifthatcriterionwouldnotbeused.
Fig. 9 shows this logic in the left (red) part in which the blue learning curve
of learner a is used to detect that not all the data is necessary and only 500
training instances are used (to save training time).
Early stopping can be applied to both sample-wise curves and
iteration-wise curves. Early stopping in sample-wise curves means retraining
a model on different training set sizes to create an empirical learning curve
with training set size as the budget. This can make sense if we do not already
know that the saturation point is larger than the available dataset size; oth-
erwise we should immediately train on the complete dataset. We can then try
to analyse the sample-wise curve of the learner for increasing training sizes
and stop as soon as we find that performances do not change significantly
between two anchors (John and Langley, 1996; Provost et al, 1999). For iter-
ative learners (such as neural networks), an iteration-wise curve is usually a
by-product that can cheaply be created in parallel to learning. Hence it might
seem more appropriate to do early stopping based on an iteration-wise curve
rather than the sample-wise curve. An additional advantage of early stopping
in iteration-wise curves is that it can help avoid over-fitting, e.g., in neural
networks (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al, 2016) or gradient boosting. While
it is conceivable that building sample-wise curves, even for iterative learners,
could be useful in some cases, we are not aware of any such work being done
for early stopping (or any other purpose).
The early stopping problem can be addressed retrospectively and pro-
jectively. Retrospective early stopping means to stop after observing the
saturation point. Projective early stopping means to predict the saturation
point before it is reached and stop precisely at the (believed) saturation
point. The projective approach is particularly important in the case of
sample-wise curves.
Earlystoppinginsample-wise curvesanddataacquisitionmightseemsim-
ilar since both define a sample size at which a process should be stopped.
However, the concepts are fundamentally different in three ways:
1. Stopped Process: Early stopping means to stop a training process (at
the saturation point) run in a machine. In contrast, the decision-making
situation in data acquisition is to stop the data acquisition process (at
the economic saturation point). The latter is sometimes carried out by
humans.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 25
Early Stopping vs. Stopping in Data Acquisition
0.30
µ MatterofEarlyStopping
a,
·
µ MatterofDataAcqusition
0.25
(argmina∈Aµa,∞ ,
·
)
0.20
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
EarlyStopping avaiabledata DataAcquisition
stopshere stopshere
Fig. 9: Early stopping with sample-wise curves stops the training process of
asinglelearnera atitssaturationpointusingits(actuallyempirical)learning
curve.Itshowsthelearningcurveoftwolearners,thebluecurveandthegreen
dashed curve. The latter has the best saturation performance. The available
datamarksarestrictiontothisprocess.Incontrast,dataacquisitionconsiders
the available data as the decision variable, and it stops collecting data when
all learners have reached their saturation performance.
2. RoleofAvailableData: Inearlystopping,theavailableamountoftraining
data is a given constraint under which early stopping operates, and data
acquisition precisely seeks to control this quantity in an economically
optimal fashion.
3. Used Performance Curve: Early Stopping uses a single learning curve of
learner a to decide upon early stopping of the training of a. Data acqui-
sition uses the learning curves of all learners under consideration (i.e., a
finite set A) and considers the budget-wise best performance achievable
(by any learner).
To clarify this difference, consider also the right (green) part of Fig. 9. The
learnera maybethebestsolutionavailablegiventhe1500datapoints(inthis
case,a barelyneeds500ofthemtoattainsaturationperformance).However,if
moredatawere available,thenatleastoneotherlearnercouldtakeadvantage
of that additional data and outperform a. The figure shows the curve of an
optimal learner a argmin µ that has the best performance if no
∗ a A a,
∈ ∈ ∞
limit is posed on the available training data (as in Cortes et al (1994)). Only
after 3000 instances, no learner will improve the overall possible performance
anymore; therefore, at this point, the data acquisition process stops.
4.1.3 Early Discarding
In many setups, the learner itself is a matter of optimisation. Consider the
situationwherewehavea(possiblyinfinite)set oflearners,e.g.,afinitesetof
algorithms, each of which can be instantiated with a possibly infinite number
ofhyper-parametrisations.Thetaskistofindthe(hyper-parametrised)learner
which performs best for the given data of size n in the sense that it creates,
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
26 Learning Curves for Decision Making
on average, the best model. Formally, if A is the (infinite) set of parametrised
learners, the goal is to find
argmin (a,n). (7)
a A C
∈
This task is commonly known as model selection.
Whileitisuncommoninliteraturetobesoexplicitanddescribethemodel
selection problem through the value of the learning curve at some sample
size,thisformulationisratherpreciseandinsightful.Itemphasisesthatwhich
learner is best might depend on the number of available training points. Note
that one needs to separate some portion of the data for validation in practice
to estimate model performances. In other words, most approaches in practice
do not even address the above problem but instead
argmin (a, αn ), (8)
a A C ⌈ ⌉
∈
where α ]0,1[ (open interval) is the training portion, typically between 70%
∈
and90%,wheretheremainingportionof1 α isusedtoestimate (a, αn ),
− C ⌈ ⌉
typically in some (possibly repeated) hold-out validation.
We could conceive that this procedure of estimating (a, αn ) might
C ⌈ ⌉
involve the construction of an empirical learning curve as a sub-routine or
on-the-fly. First, if a is an iterative learner, then the model performance
(a, αn ) = (a, αn ,t ) is the performance of the iteration-wise curve at
∗
C ⌈ ⌉ C ⌈ ⌉
some point t where the learning process is stopped. Therefore, the whole
∗
iteration-wise curve (a, αn ,t ) is available for analysis. Second, even if
∗
C ⌈ ⌉
a is not incremental, one could create an schedule α ,..,α of increasing
1 k
{ }
α α and thereby create a sample-wise curve (Mohr and van Rijn, 2023).
i
≤
Such a sample-wise curve would also offer the perspective, via extrapolation,
to address Eq. (7) rather than just Eq. (8).
In the light of the availability of such a (partial) empirical learning curve,
early discarding is the practice of aborting the performance estimation proce-
dure of a candidate as soon as it becomes apparent from that curve that the
candidate cannot be the solution to the above optimisation problem.
Formally, this is to drop a candidate a as soon as the criterion
(a,b )> min (a ,b ) (9)
ref ∗ ref
C a∗∈ AC
can be verified, where b is usually n or αn . In other words, as soon as
ref
⌈ ⌉
it can be shown that a is not the best learner of all possible learners A, no
further resources should be committed to training learner a. Note that, even
though the terms are frequently mixed up in literature, this is very different
from early stopping, in which the convergence of the curve of a single learner
is considered in isolation (cf. Fig. 1).
Early discarding has been applied to both observation (Adriaensen et al,
2023;MohrandvanRijn,2021,2023;Ruhkopfetal,2023)anditeration(Adri-
aensenetal,2023;Domhanetal,2015;Kleinetal,2017b;Ruhkopfetal,2023;
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 27
Swersky et al, 2014) learning curves. In the first case, one is sampling from
(a, ) at different anchors n and hopes to be able to drop sub-optimal can-
C ·
didates at n b anchors (much) smaller than the target size b . In the
ref ref
≪
second case, one always uses the complete dataset (or at least all data desig-
nated for training, say n), observes samples of (a,n, ) for different anchors
C ·
(maybe epochs) t, and seeks to avoid convergence if it can be foreseen that
the convergence performance will be sub-optimal.
Earlydiscardingismoreaggressivethanearlystoppingbecauseitdoesnot
need to wait until the learning curve converges. On the contrary, one tries to
avoid reaching convergence since this is considered a waste of resources in the
casethatthelearnerperformssub-optimal.Inanextremecaseanddepending
onavailableknowledgeaboutlearners(cf.Sec.4.3),onecouldonlyuseasingle
point of an empirical learning curve to discard a candidate.
Situations in which early discarding plays a role can be further classified
into horizontal and vertical scenarios (and a mixture of the two):
1. Horizontal Model Selection. Horizontal model selection implies an apriori
fixed finite set of learning algorithms, from which one has to be selected.
Empiricallearningcurvesaregrowniterativelyforthewholesetorshrink-
ing subsets of it. Successive halving and related works are a prominent
example of horizontal decision making (Van den Bosch, 2004; Jamieson
and Talwalkar, 2016). However, these approaches only consider the last
anchor point (rather than the complete learning curve).
2. Vertical Model Selection. Vertical means that the set of learners is gener-
allynotlimitedtoafiniteset,andthesetofevaluated learnercandidates
evolvesovertime(i.e.,notfixedapriori).Learnersareevaluatedoneafter
another.Eachlearnerisevaluatedinaniterativefashiontogrowalearn-
ingcurveandallowforearlydiscarding.Examplesaretheearlydiscarding
routine for deep networks by Domhan et al (2015) or, more generally, for
learning curve cross-validation (Mohr and van Rijn, 2021, 2023).
3. Diagonal Model Selection. This case is similar to the vertical decision-
making situation with the difference that one does allow to continue the
evaluation of a candidate at a later point. Hence, candidates are not
evaluated one after another, but the evaluation of different candidates
canbeinterleaved.ExamplesareBayesianoptimisation-basedapproaches
to pause and continue evaluations of (not necessarily iterative) learn-
ers (Klein et al, 2017a; Swersky et al, 2014). Non-iterative learners must
be trained from scratch with the increased budget.
Another approach that addresses this type of decision-making situa-
tion is Hyperband (Li et al, 2017) and Bayesian optimisation based on
progressive sampling (Zeng and Luo, 2017). However, neither of these
approaches considers learning curves even though they implicitly con-
struct them. Decisions are taken based on the observations of the largest
anchor point considered so far.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
28 Learning Curves for Decision Making
4.2 Technical Questions Asked About Learning Curves
A plethora of questions can be asked about learning curves. Fig. 10 gives an
overview of these questions. The figure is organised in three layers (depth
dimension) corresponding to the three types of estimates discussed in Sec. 3.
Each layer consists of a set of questions that can be posed about learning
curves. From bottom to top, the questions are ordered by complexity, and
an arrow from one question to another indicates that the question with the
incoming arrow is more general. Answering the more general question also
implies answering the less general question.
In the simplest case, we can answer a binary question. There are four
relevantquestions,i.e.,(i)whethersomespecificanchorpoint,e.g.,thedataset
size,isbeyondthesaturationpoint(b b ),(ii)whethertheperformance
sat ref
≤
of a learner at the saturation point is better than some baseline τ (p
sat
≤
τ), (iii) whether the performance p := (a,b ) at some reference point
ref ref
C
b is better than some threshold τ, or (iv) whether a specific anchor point
ref
is beyond the utility-based stopping point (bu < b ). To our knowledge,
sat ref
the only approaches in this category are those implicitly answering question
(iii) by discarding candidates that are not believed to be competitive (see,
e.g., Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016; Petrak, 2000; Zeng and Luo, 2017); here
τ = min (a,b ) is the (unknown) best performance of any learner on
a A ref
∈ C
the target size.
Afamilyofslightlymoregeneralquestionstriestoorder asetAoflearning
algorithms w.r.t. their performance at some (future) anchor b . We denote
ref
this ordering as π (a,b ). Here, b is typically the maximum avail-
a A ref ref
∈ ∼C
able training data, even if an iteration-wise curve is considered because then
thisistheterminationperformanceofthatcurve.Inthesimplestcase,wecould
ask for a concrete pair of two learning algorithms a , a whether (a ,b )
1 2 1 ref
C ≥
(a ,b ),i.e.,whichwillperformbetteratsomereferencepoint.Forexample,
2 ref
C
the work by Leite and Brazdil (2005) answers this question. If this question is
simultaneously asked for a set of or even all possible pairs of algorithms, one
asks for a partial or even the full ranking π (a,b ) of algorithms. A
a A ref
∈ ∼C
particular case is to ask only for the best algorithm a = argmin (a,b ),
∗ a ref
C
which implicitly answers that (a ,b ) (a,b ) for any learner a but
∗ ref ref
C ≤ C
without explicitly asking for any other comparisons. Still, the comparison is
merelyqualitative,andansweringthisquestiondoesnotnecessarilyrequireto
quantify any aspect of any learning curve.
The above questions are merely qualitative and not quantitative, which
gives rise to a third level of complexity, where the concrete values of
b (Provost et al, 1999), p (Cortes et al, 1993), p (Baker et al, 2018;
sat sat ref
ChandrashekaranandLane,2017;LeiteandBrazdil,2003,2004),orbu (Weiss
sat
andTian,2008)arebeingmodelled.Here,thereferenceperformancep isthe
ref
performance at a fixed reference point, often the number of training samples
available for cross-validation.
All questions up to this point produce closed answers in the sense that the
answer is either a boolean value, a number, or a finite ranking of candidates.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 29
Distribution estimates
Range estimates
Point estimates
Portfolioofcurves
Whatis Whatis
C U
Curvesoflearner
Whatis (a, )or (a, , ) Whatis (a, )or (a, , )
C · C · · U · U · ·
Conservativeboundoncurve
Determine (a, )or (a, , ) Determine (a, )or (a, , )
C · C · · U · U · ·
Value
Whatisbsat Whatispsat Whatispref Whatisb
s
u
at
Ranking
Whatis
πa
∈
A∼C (a,bref)
Binary
bsat≤ bref psat≤ τ pref
≤
τ b
s
u
at≤
bref
Fig. 10: Technical questions that can be asked on learning curves.
At the fourth level, the task is to make assertions about arbitrary points of
a learning curve. However, the answers do not yet refer to the value of the
learning curve itself but only a bound on those values.
At a fifth level, we could eventually ask for a model of the whole learning
curve of a learner a, i.e., (a, ) for sample-wise curves (Figueroa et al, 2012;
C ·
Frey and Fisher, 1999; Gu et al, 2001; John and Langley, 1996; Mukherjee
etal,2003)or (a,n, )foriteration-wise curvesgivenafixed(sample)anchor
C ·
n (Cortes et al, 1993; Domhan et al, 2015). We can ask a similar question for
the utility curve. While the question is on the same level, it is more general,
as it is based on the learning curve itself (Last, 2007, 2009; Weiss and Tian,
2006) and combines it with other information such as acquisition costs.
Finally,atthesixthandmostgenerallevel,wecouldaskforamodelofthe
whole performance function , i.e., the model of the learning curves across all
C
learners (Klein et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014). Analogously, this question
could be asked for the whole utility function , which is arguably the most
U
complex and general question that can be asked, although we are not aware
of any works that have done so.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
30 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Sincealloftheabovequestionsareansweredbasedonobservationalstatis-
tics, we can also consider noise and uncertainty aspects for the quantitative
questions.Inthesimplestcase(bluelayer,cf.Sec.3.1),weonlygetpointesti-
mates, i.e., the estimate of at one or a set of points. Since these estimates
C
are always afflicted with uncertainty, it is reasonable to ask for quantifica-
tions of this uncertainty. One form is to express strict bounds as in the fourth
layer,whichmaybederivedfromassumptionsaboutthelearningcurveshape,
e.g., convexity (Mohr and van Rijn, 2021, 2023). Another form is to express
probabilistic bounds like confidence intervals around (Figueroa et al, 2012;
C
Koshute et al, 2021) (cf. Sec. 3.2). In the most general form, we can ask for
a full belief model of the learning curves, specifying a probability distribution
over the values of at one point or a set thereof (Domhan et al, 2015; Klein
C
et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014) (cf. Sec. 3.3).
It is common practice to solve relatively simple questions by implicitly
answering more complex ones. For example, a typical question in the context
of model selection is whether the performance of a candidate learner at some
given data or in the limit will beat a known baseline (Domhan et al, 2015;
Leite and Brazdil, 2005; van Rijn et al, 2015). This is the binary question of
p p , where p is the best-known performance. Often, this question is
ref ∗ ∗
≤
answered by estimating p (maybe p ) explicitly and then comparing it to
ref lim
p (Leite and Brazdil, 2005; van Rijn et al, 2015), which is an answer to a
∗
slightlymorecomplicatedquestion.Domhanetal(2015);Swerskyetal(2014)
built an explicit curve model, for estimating p and p , respectively. The
lim ref
approach answers this binary question by building an entire learning curve
modelandthenderivesthebinaryanswerfromit.Therationalebehindthisis
the notion that one often needs rather complex models to find a high-quality
answer to a simple question, and it is just a side effect that one can then even
answer other questions with those models.
4.3 Used Data Resources for Inference
Abovewehavediscussedaseriesofquestionsthatcanbeaskedaboutlearning
curve properties, which in turn are important for decision making in a spe-
cificcontext.Ofcourse,answeringthesequestionsrequiresspecificinformative
resources.Inaconcretedecision-makingsituation,wearetypicallyconfronted
with a dataset and a learner or a portfolio of learners. We call this the target
dataset and the current learner. That is, we want to say something about the
learningcurveofthecurrentlearnerinadomaininwhichwehaveafinite(the
target) dataset d available.
Fig. 11 shows the types of data resources that can be used to answer ques-
tions about learning curves. We can utilise empirical learning curves gathered
on the target dataset, empirical learning curves gathered on other datasets,
dataset meta-features, and features describing the learners. Learning curves
gatheredonthetargetdatasetcomeataparticularcomputationalcost,asthey
needtobegeneratedduringtheprocess.Typically,whenmodellingthecurrent
learneronthetargetdataset,apartial empiricallearningcurveisconstructed,
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 31
Data
Resources
Dataset
Target Other Learner
Meta-
Dataset Datasets Features
Features
Curveson Curveson Curveson Curveson
Current Other Other Current
Learner Learners Learners Learner
Fig. 11: Taxonomy of data resources for learning curve analysis
whichcanthenbestep-wiseextendedordiscarded(Domhanetal,2015;Leite
and Brazdil, 2003; Provost et al, 1999). When using learning curves of other
datasets, those are usually available up to a large portion of the dataset size
(with a specific schedule of anchors) in the case of sample-wise curves or until
convergence in the case of iteration-wise curves. This is because these curves
couldbepreparedofflinebeforethetargetdatasetbecameavailable(Leiteand
Brazdil, 2003, 2010; van Rijn et al, 2015). Both learning curves of the current
learner and other learners can be utilised for this. In the context of model
selection,variouslearnersareusuallyevaluated.Thereforewecanacquirevar-
ious learning curves of other learners on the target dataset (Baker et al, 2018;
Chandrashekaran and Lane, 2017; Klein et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014).
Other types of data resources that can be used are meta-features on
the datasets and learner features. These are measurable qualities of the
dataset and learner, respectively, and these can indicate how similar specific
datasets (or learners) are. These give the decision-making algorithm a sense
of which learning curves are more informative for the current learner and tar-
get dataset. To the best of our knowledge, the only line of research utilising
meta-features for learning curve modelling is the work of Leite and Brazdil
(2008, 2010); Ruhkopf et al (2023). The description of learners through fea-
tures for the sake of model prediction is specifically prevalent in the analysis
of iteration-wise curves (Baker et al, 2018; Klein et al, 2017b; Swersky et al,
2014). The development and analysis of meta-features is a research field in its
own right; for more information, we refer the reader to Brazdil et al (2022).
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
32 Learning Curves for Decision Making
5 Literature Review on learning curve
extrapolation methods
This section presents the literature review that covers methods to model and
utiliselearningcurves.Weorganiseapproachesbasedonthekeyproblemthey
resolve on a rather abstract level and independent of the purpose or type of
decision-making situation in which they were presented. We organise it along
the framework presented in Fig. 10, particularly along the axis that reflects
the technical question asked about a learning curve. The motivation to not
use the type of decision-making situation, which is also a prominent property
of these methods, is that the same approach can be used in different decision-
makingsituations.Forexample,LeiteandBrazdil(2004)presentandmotivate
anapproachtoidentifytheportionofsomegivendatathatshouldbeusedfor
training(i.e.,determinethesaturationpoint),butthesameapproachcouldbe
used to determine how much more data would be needed to obtain saturation
performance.Similarly,Domhanetal(2015)presentanapproachthataimsto
decideduringtrainingwhetheraneuralnetworkwillbecomecompetitive(ask
forsaturationperformance);however,theydidthisbymodellingthecomplete
learning curves.
Fig.12givesanoverviewofallthemethodscategorisedinthisframework.
We make the following two observations.
•
Most learning curve methods address the early discarding / model selection
decision-makingsituation.Thisimpliesthatthereisanopportunityformore
research on, for example, data acquisition or early stopping. We note that
researchtowardsactivelearningprovidesmanyapproachesthathandledata
acquisition (which we do not cover), which might serve as a basis for a
literature search.
•
Second,mostmethodsarecentredaroundthemiddlelevelsofproblemcom-
plexitytheyaddress,i.e.,predictingtheactualvalueofalearneratacertain
point and predicting the complete curves of a learner. It seems logical that
therearebenefitsforexploitingthesituationwhereeitherthecompleteport-
folio is modelled (e.g., the benefit of parameter sharing, the opportunity of
modelacquisition)orthebinaryproblemissolved(becauseofthesimplicity
oftheproblemdefinition).Methodsaddressingthebinarysituation,suchas
Successive Halving and Hyperband, have attracted quite some attention.
To further structure the overview, we divide the whole literature on methods
for learning curves into two roughly even groups according to the usage of
a learning curve model as described in Sec. 3. Approaches in the first group
do not employ a learning curve model. These approaches address the ques-
tions defined in the four lowest levels of the framework (see Sec. 5.1). In
contrast, approaches of the second group, i.e., which employ a learning curve
model, address questions in the top two levels of the framework (see Sec. 5.2).
Approaches with a curve model are more general, but that does not neces-
sarily mean they give better answers to simpler questions. In fact, Kielh¨ofer
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 33
DataAcquisition EarlyStopping / E M ar o ly de D l i S sc e a le r c d t i i n o g n Unclear/Mixed
Swerskyetal
Portfolio (2014);Wistuba Kleinetal(2017a,b)
andPedapati(2019)
Cortesetal(1993);
JohnandLangley
(1996);Guetal FreyandFisher
(2001);Mukherjee (1999);Boonyanunta
CurvesofLearner Ric g h o t f e t r aa a r nd (2 K 01 h 9 o ) sh- e e e t t t a a a l l l ( ( ( 2 2 2 0 0 0 1 0 1 5 3 2 ) ) ) ; ; ; C F D a i o g r m u d e o h r n a o a n a - H (2 a e 0 n s 0 d s 4 a ) Z n ; e d S ep i W n h g o e h n i g ( ( s 2 2 e 0 0 k 0 1 u 5 0 l ) ) ; ;
Escobaretal(2017); Kolachinaetal(2012);
Adriaensenetal(2023); Koshuteetal(2021)
Kielh¨oferetal(2024);
Egeleetal(2024)
Sabharwaletal
Conservative (2016);Mohrand
boundoncurve vanRijn(2023)
Meeketal(2002);
Bishop(1995);John
Q p u r V a e a n d l t i u i c t e t a i t / o i n ve W ( e 2 i 0 ss 06 a , n 2 d 00 T 8 i ) an P an r L o d e v i o t L e s a t n a e n g t l d e a y B l ( r ( 1 a 1 9 z 9 d 9 9 6 i 9 l ) ) ; ; B C a a n h k d a e n r L d a e r n t a e s a h l ( e 2 ( k 0 2 a 1 0 r 7 1 a ) 8 n ; ) C L o a r s t t e ( s 2 e 0 t 07 a , l 2 (1 0 9 0 9 9 4 ); )
(2003,2004);Ng
andDash(2006)
Q R p u r a e a n d l k i i t c i a n t t i g o iv n / e L v e R i a t 2 u n e 0 h 0 R a k 7 n o i , j d p n 2 f B 0 e e 0 t r t 8 a a a , z l l d 2 ( i ( 0 l 2 2 1 0 ( 0 0 2 1 2 ) 0 5 3 ; 0 ) ) ; 5,
Petrak(2000);Vanden
Bosch(2004);Jamieson
Binary andTalwalkar(2016);
Lietal(2017);Zeng
andLuo(2017)
Fig. 12: Overview of the methods (indicated by the bibliographic reference)
covered and categorised in this framework. Each method is categorised along
the problem type they solve (vertical axis) and the type of decision-making
situationtheyexplicitlyaddress(horizontalaxis).Somemethodsareemployed
to address multiple decision-making situations. Some papers do not explicitly
state which decision-making situation is being addressed, or address multiple.
Thesearecategorisedinthelastcolumn.Severalmodelscanbeusedformore
decision-making situations than the original paper evaluated them on. For
example, the portfolio approaches could in theory be used for any decision-
making situation.
etal(2024)showthatthemodel-freeMDSapproachdiscussedinSec.5.1.2in
specific situations outperforms a parametric model such as the ones presented
by Gu et al (2001) discussed in Sec. 5.2.1. In total, the approaches cover 10
of the questions discussed in Sec. 4.2, which are organized in the following
sub-sections:
5.1. Approaches without learning curve model:
1. Is the target performance of a learner worse than the one of the best
learner, i.e., p >min (a,b )?
ref a A ref
∈ C
2. Whatistheorderingπ (a,b )ofthelearningalgorithmsw.r.t.
a A ref
∈ ∼C
their performance at some target anchor?
3. What is the saturation performance (p )?
sat
4. What is the saturation point (b )?
sat
5. What is the utility-based stopping point (bu )?
sat
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
34 Learning Curves for Decision Making
6. Whatisthevalueofthelearningcurveataspecific(fixedandknown)
point? ( (a,n) or (a,n,t))
C C
7. What is a lower/upper bound of the learning curve at any point?
( (a, ) or (a,n, ))
C · C ·
5.2. Approaches with a model for the learning curve:
1. What is the value of the learning curve at any (queryable) point?
( (a, ) or (a,n, ))
C · C ·
2. What is the utility at an arbitrary anchor point? ( (a, ) or (a,n, ))
U · U ·
3. What is the value of the learning curve at any queryable point of any
queryable learner? ( (, ))
C · ·
We organise the rest of this section exactly according to this scheme.
For each approach, we always consider the most general problem it solves,
independently of how this solution is used in the context of a paper. For
example, Domhan et al (2015) decide whether the saturation performance of
a learner beats some threshold (question at the binary level) but develop a
learning curve model and are hence discussed alongside the approaches for
question 1 in Sec. 5.2.1.
5.1 Approaches Without Learning Curve Models
Manyinterestingquestionsrelatedtolearningcurvescanbeaddressedwithout
even building an explicit learning curve model. None of the questions in the
lower layers in Fig. 10 necessarily requires a learning curve model. Fig. 13
showsasummaryofalltheapproachesweareawareof,whichmakesignificant
assertions or decisions related to learning curves without building a learning
curve model.
5.1.1 Prediction of Candidate Competitiveness (Binary)
In this section, we discuss approaches that answer the early stopping criterion
posed in Eq. 9 without using a learning curve model. The early discarding
criterion can be seen as an instantiation of the binary question p τ,
ref
≤
where τ = min (a ,b ) is the best value that any learner on the
a∗∈ A
C
∗ ref
available resources. This (conceptually simple) question is often answered by
applying sophisticated learning curve models. The usage of learning curve
models is understandable since, at the time of the decision, neither p nor
ref
min (a ,b ) is known; therefore, extrapolating learning curves offers a
a∗∈ A
C
∗ ref
possibilitytomakeassessmentsaboutthesequantities.However,itisalsopos-
sibletosaysomethingabouttheearlydiscardingconditionwithoutalearning
curve model.
As far as we know, the only type of approach in this category is hori-
zontal early discarding with an implicit affirmation of the early discarding
criterion that only uses the last anchor of the empirical learning curve. That
is, during the model selection process, all remaining members of a candi-
date set A are trained to some budget. This budget can be either a sample
size (sample-wise curves), learning iterations, or time (iteration-wise curves).
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 35
ApproachesWithoutExplicitLearningCurveModel
1994 1995 1996 1999 2000 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2010 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 2023
Cortesetal(19 J B o 9 i h 4 s ) n ho a p nd (1 L 9 a 9 n 5 g ) l P ey ro ( v 1 o 9 s 9 t 6 e ) tal(19 P 9 e 9 t ) rak M (2 ee 0 L k 0 e 0 e it ) t e a a l n ( d 20 B L 0 e r 2 a it ) z e di a l n ( d 20 B 0 r 3 V a ) z a d n il d ( e 2 n 0 L 0 B e 4 o it ) s e ch an ( d 20 B 0 r 4 a ) z N di g l( a 2 n 0 d 0 W D 5) a e s is h s ( a 2 n 0 L d 0 e 6 T it ) i e an an ( d 20 B L 0 e r 6 a it ) z e di a l n ( d 20 B 0 r W 7 a ) z e d is il s ( a 2 n 0 L d 0 e 8 T it ) i e an an ( d 20 B 0 r 8 a ) z J v d a a i n m l( i R e 2 s i 0 j o n 1 n 0 e ) a t n a d l( T 2 a 0 lw 1 S 5 a ) a lk b a h r a ( r 2 w 0 a 1 l 6 e ) tal(20 L C 1 i 6 h e ) Z a t n e a d n l r g ( a 2 s a 0 h n 1 e d k 7 a ) L r u a o n ( a 2 n 0 d 17 L ) ane B ( a 2 k 0 e 1 r 7 e ) t R a u l h ( k 2 M o 0 p o 1 f h 8 e r ) t a a n l d (2 v 0 a 2 n 3 R ) ijn(2023)
ssat susat pref>τ πa∈A∼C(a,sref) C(a,·) C(a,sref) plim
Fig. 13: Citations across approaches without learning curve models. The
colours indicate the question addressed about learning curves. Normal arrows
indicatethatthepapercitedtheotherpaper,andcolouredarrowsindicatean
experimental comparison with previous approaches.
Then, some portion of candidates A is removed from A based on the last
−
value of their respective curve. The implicit assumption is that (a,b ) >
ref
C
min (a ,b ) for every a A .
a∗∈ A
C
∗ ref
∈
−
To our knowledge, the first algorithm in this line was introduced in the
Wrapped Progressive Sampling procedure (WPS) by Van den Bosch (2004).
In this approach, a dynamically computed subset of the candidate set A is
discarded (instead of a constant fraction as 50%). WPS creates a histogram
withtenbinsb ,..,b ofthecandidatesinAbasedontheirvalidationaccuracy
1 10
to decide which candidates are discarded. Then WPS identifies the largest
index i = max i N,< 10 : b < b of a bin that has fewer elements
− i i+1
{ ∈ | | | |}
thanitssuccessor.Then,allcandidatesinbinswithanindexlowerorequali
−
are dropped. In an extreme case, all except one candidate might be dropped
right in the first iteration, e.g., if b =1 and b =0.
10 9
| | | |
More recently, successive halving (Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016) and
hyperband (Li et al, 2017) have been introduced, which are both adequate
methods based on a simple concept. Successive halving considers a set of can-
didate models A, which all receive an initial budget. It iteratively drops 50%
of the candidate set A while doubling the remaining candidates’ budget until
a single candidate model remains. Hyperband is a series of successive halving
brackets, where each bracket is initialised with an increased initial budget and
a new initial set of candidates. Zeng and Luo (2017) proposed an extended
version in which all the candidates that perform worse than the best candi-
datebysomeconstantandpre-definedmarginarediscarded.Interestingly,the
above approaches operate without a learning curve model for extrapolation
andrefrainfromusingtheexistingobservationsotherthancomparingthelast
seen values. Therefore, neither predictions nor observations of recent trends
are being utilised. Nonetheless, these methods perform well empirically and
come with theoretical guarantees.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
36 Learning Curves for Decision Making
5.1.2 Candidate Ranking
Themethodsinthissectionaimtorankthelearningalgorithmswithrespectto
their(expected)performanceatthefulldatasetsize.InourschemeinSec.4.2
and Fig. 10, we denote this question as π (a,b ). Depending on the
a A ref
∈ ∼C
available resources (cf. Sec. 4.3), such a ranking can be based on the other
learning curves available from other contexts and the explicit characterisation
of such contexts, e.g., features that describe datasets or algorithms.
Ranking Without Context Description
The first approach we are aware of to address this problem was metalearning
on data samples (MDS) presented by Leite and Brazdil (2005) through the
notion of comparing two learners, i.e., a ranking of two. Given a dataset,
MDS decides which of two algorithms is the better choice on a given dataset.
Therefore, it can be used for early discarding. The authors specifically use an
SVM and a C5 decision tree but rightfully claim that any algorithm could be
used. The formal basis of the work is the same as the one introduced in their
previous work (Leite and Brazdil, 2003, 2004). Similar to previous work, it
assumesthatempiricallearningcurves(withstandardisedanchorsizes)forthe
learnerunderexaminationarealreadyknownforother datasets.Additionally,
it builds upon the idea of quantifying the distance between the target and
the other datasets based on the sum of squared distances over the already-
knownperformancesatanchorsofthetargetdataset.Oncethemostsimilark
learning curves have been identified, MDS assigns a score to each learner that
is the mean accuracy of its k nearest neighbours (at the final anchor). It then
selects the algorithm with the higher score.
Leite and Brazdil (2005) acknowledge that this method may result in poor
rankings because even the closest learning curve on other datasets can still
be substantially different and propose learning curve adaption as a remedy.
Instead of forming the mean directly over the target anchors of the nearest
neighbour empirical learning curves, the authors first scale those curves to
make them more similar to the shape already observed on the target dataset.
To this end, they compute a scaling constant under which the overall anchor-
wisedistanceisminimisedandthenmultiplyallthescoreswiththisconstant.
This version of the MDS algorithm is called AMDS (probably for Adaptive
MDS).
Interestingly, one can argue that this adaption technique could be applied
either before or after determining the k nearest neighbours. Doing it before
could lead to other (and better) nearest neighbours because then the neigh-
boursaredeterminedmorewithrespecttotheshape ofthelearningcurve,and
theoffset playsmuchlessofarole.However,intheabovepaper,theadaption
is done after retrieving the neighbours.
Theauthorsextendedtheapproachbycreatinganonlinesamplingscheme
with the SetGen algorithm (Leite and Brazdil, 2007). SetGen is an online
adaption of AMDS in that, after each acquired anchor, it is decided whether
andwhichanchorshouldbeevaluatedwitheachalgorithm;thisconsidersboth
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 37
the (believed) accuracy and the runtime. This procedure can be seen as a way
of racing between the algorithms. The potential of each additional amount of
budget is judged based on the metalearning database.
Animplicitassumptionofallapproachesinthislineofresearchisthatthe
datasets in the database from which performances are extracted need to be
at least as big as the target dataset. This issue was first explicitly treated in
the Pairwise Curve Comparison approach (PCC) (van Rijn et al, 2015). This
algorithm builds upon the works of Leite and Brazdil (2010) and implements
a voting scheme to identify the best learning algorithm of a portfolio; votes
are distributed based on wins, which are determined based on the predicted
performanceatthecompletedatasetd.vanRijnetal(2015)explicitlydiscuss
theissueifthesizesofdatasetsinthedatabaseandthetargetdatasetarenot
identical.Ingeneral,thepointforwhichpredictionsmustbemadeistypically
not one of the anchors; it is typically not a power of 2 but rather 90% of
the given dataset size (due to the holdout scheme). A remedy is to resort to
the closest available anchor in the schedule. However, if the highest anchor
available for another dataset is much smaller than the required training size
of the target dataset, then it is unclear how that curve should be used.
Ranking With Context Description
Thefirstworkweareawareofthatrealisesanexplicitcontextdescriptionwas
proposed by Leite and Brazdil (2008, 2010). Similar to the methods discussed
earlier, these methods select the k nearest datasets to measure the relevance
of known complete learning curves of other datasets for performance predic-
tion on the target dataset. The main difference is that, in addition to the
contribution of the partial learning curve itself to the distance, they also use
the distance between the datasets in terms of their meta-features. More pre-
cisely, they compute the Manhattan distance between seven range-normalised
dataset meta-features, e.g., dataset size, number of symbolic and numerical
attributes, etc. The overall distance between the datasets is then the sum of
the distance between the partial learning curves and the distance in terms of
meta-features.ThisworkwasmarginallyrefinedintheSelectionofAlgorithms
using Metalearning approach(SAM),whichappliesthesamelogicbutassigns
a weight to each of the two distance sources (Leite and Brazdil, 2010); the
weight is however implicitly assumed to be set to 0.5.
ArecentandentirelydifferentapproachtocandidaterankingistheMASIF
transformer framework (Ruhkopf et al, 2023). This approach takes partial
learningcurvesofdifferentlearnersonthecurrenttask,whichmayhavepoten-
tiallydifferentlengthsandcombinesthemwithdatasetmeta-featuresinorder
to predict latent utility values of each learner as expected for the complete
dataset. The transformer is trained based on previous experiences on datasets
for which true rankings among the learners have been computed for the com-
plete dataset. It is unclear to which degree the utility values predicted by
the transformer resemble the actual performance of the learners at the target
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
38 Learning Curves for Decision Making
size, but the paper suggests that the ordering π (a,b ) of the learn-
a A ref
∈ ∼C
ers according to these scores is relatively faithful to the true ordering induced
by the actual performances.
5.1.3 Identification of Saturation Performance
Estimating the limit or saturation performance p is helpful in two decision-
sat
making situations:
1. for sample-wise curves, it can be used for data acquisition by checking
whether the availability of more data promises to improve predictive
performance significantly.
2. for iteration-wise curves, it can be used for early discarding. Given a
threshold p, we can determine whether training a model to convergence
will achieve a generalisation performance of at least p.
To the best of our knowledge, the question on estimates of p is the only
sat
of the above questions that received a substantial amount of theoretical con-
tributions. This is not surprising since p is an asymptotic quantity that
sat
is arguably suited for theoretical analysis. The root of this line of research
is the statistical mechanics framework (Seung et al, 1992). This and related
research (Amari and Murata, 1993; Fine and Mukherjee, 1999; Murata et al,
1992) consider a type of capacity curve in which asymptotic properties of the
learning curve are expressed in terms of the number of parameters, usually
those of a neural network. However, a side observation of these works is that
there is a kind of symmetrical behaviour between the train error and the
validation error (sometimes called generalisation error).
Cortes et al (1994) take these observations to use the mean of the two
empirical curves to estimate p as soon as the training error starts to rise,
sat
i.e., as soon as the model cannot accommodate the training data perfectly
anymore.Althoughthisworkconsiderscapacitycurvestoidentifytheintrinsic
noiselevelofthedata,i.e.,theminimumerrornecessarilymadebyany learner,
they also report the asymptotic performance of a neural network on a single
data set.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the only approach that estimates
p without building an explicit learning curve model. While several other
sat
methods are capable of estimating p of iteration-wise curves of neural net-
sat
works (Domhan et al, 2015; Swersky et al, 2014), these rely on full learning
curve models, which are therefore discussed in Sec. 5.2.1.
5.1.4 Identification of Saturation Point
Identifying the saturation point b of sample-wise curves is useful in the
sat
following cases:
1. Early-Stopping with sample-wise curves: Which portion of the available
data is necessary to obtain saturation performance?
This is relevant if d >b or the relationship between d and b is
sat sat
| | | |
unknown and training on full d is potentially undesirable.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 39
2. Early-Stopping with iteration-wise curves: How many iterations are nec-
essary until performance converges? This applies to incremental learners,
such as neural networks.
3. Data acquisition: How many additional labelled observations are neces-
sarytoobtain(near-optimal)performance?Thisappliesif d <b .The
sat
| |
question can be posed for a specific learner or a portfolio.
Retrospective Approaches
The simplest way of determining the saturation point b is to incrementally
sat
build a learning curve and stop as soon as it is believed that the saturation
point has been exceeded. If we do this, we can estimate that the saturation
pointliesbetweenthelasttwoanchors.Foriteration-wise curves,determining
b comes for free as a side-product of the training procedure. It is com-
sat
monly used for training neural networks (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al,
2016). On the other hand, it requires restarting and is potentially costly for
sample-wise curves.
JohnandLangley(1996)defineadynamicsampling approachtodetermine
theb forsample-wise curves.Astraightforwardapproachmentionedinthat
sat
paper is to observe whether the performance has become worse on the last
sampledanchor.Ifso,onemightconsidergatheringempiricalevidencethatthe
saturation point has been exceeded, i.e., it should be somewhere between the
lasttwoanchors.However,theauthorsarguethatpreliminaryresultsindicate
thatthisapproachoftenstopstooearly.Thisismainlycausedbyhighaleatoric
uncertainty,whichimpliesnoisyempiricallearningcurves.Ontheotherhand,
one could argue that this approach stops far too late because it can require
quitesomeiterationsuntil,bychance,theobservedperformanceisworsethan
the one of the last iteration. Therefore, John and Langley (1996) propose also
a model-based approach to avoid this problem, which we discuss in Sec. 5.2.1.
Of course, when having access to such a model, we can query the expected
performance and compare it to the performance at the last anchor.
Provostetal(1999)addressthestabilityissuesandalso(someof)theeffi-
ciency issues of the above trivial approach in a scheme they call progressive
sampling. Similar to dynamic sampling (John and Langley, 1996), progressive
samplinginducesmodelsforeachanchorinthescheduleuntiltheconvergence
of the learning curve is detected. There are two main differences between the
twoapproaches.First,theauthorsproposetousegeometrical insteadofarith-
metic schedules, i.e., a schedule of the form bk instead of bk, where b is a
constant and k is the position of an anchor in the schedule. They prove that
everygeometricscheduleisasymptoticallyoptimalintermsofruntime;thatis,
everysuchschedulehasthesameasymptoticruntimeastheschedulethateval-
uatesonlyonb .Thisoptimalityproofonlyholdsintheasymptoticcalculus;
sat
in practice, there are better and less good geometric schedules. For example,
Provost et al (1999) propose a dynamic programming approach (called DP),
whichefficientlycomputesthecost-optimalschedulebasedonapriordistribu-
tion on b and a given training runtime model. The second difference is that
sat
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
40 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Provostetal(1999)checkwhetherthesaturationpointhasbeenreachedusing
a method called linear regression with local sampling (LRLS), which samples
notonlyat butalsocloselyaround anchorstoestimatetheslopeatananchor
and stop if the slope is close to zero.
The practical benefit of the LRLS scheme is not entirely clear for
sample-wise curves. First, since the slope is also based on empirical values,
fromatheoreticalviewpoint,itisnotclearthatthecriterionisnecessarilybet-
ter than the naive approach suggested by John and Langley (1996). Second,
the approach is more expensive than the naive approach because more obser-
vationsneedtobesampled;thiscanbeasubstantialfactor,especiallyforlarge
anchors. LRLS becomes relevant when applied to learners that have a compu-
tationalcomplexityfortrainingthatscalesworsethanlinearinthenumberof
training points (e.g., Gaussian processes or decision trees). For learners with
trainingcomplexitylinearinthenumberofobservations,itwilloftenbemore
expensive than evaluating a learner’s performance on the complete dataset.
This can be seen with a simple calculation, in which we assume roughly linear
training time complexity: Suppose a costly anchor at 40% of the overall data
size.Ifwedrawonlytwoadditionalsamplesaroundthisanchor,thentherun-
time is around 120% of the runtime we would have had if we had trained on
the complete dataset once. While Provost et al (1999) argue that LRLS only
adds a constant factor to the runtime, Sarkar et al (2015) reasonably argue
that this factor is often prohibitive in practice.
The approaches in this section explicitly assume that more data than b
sat
is available. This implies that they can be used primarily for early stopping
scenarios rather than data acquisition scenarios. Still, if a learner does not
attain saturation performance on the complete dataset, the approaches can
detect this at the cost of the additional evaluations at the non-final anchors.
Concerning the stability of estimates, Beleites et al (2013) point out the
necessity to have an estimate for the confidence interval not only for the per-
formance at the anchors in the training schedule but also on the test data.
They argue that confidence intervals are essential when deciding whether rea-
sonable generalisation statements can be made for a classifier. This changes
the notion of the stopping point to, perhaps, a confident stopping point. The
optimalstoppingpointmaybereachedearly,butthevalidationfoldsizesmay
still be too small to assure stable assertions. Typically, the confidence inter-
vals are large on small anchors and then contract for increasing anchor sizes.
Based on credible intervals, the authors propose choosing the anchor point
that achieves a sufficiently narrow interval on the test data.
Ng and Dash (2006) address the impact of class imbalance on the per-
formance of a learner. That approach hypothesises that, without further
knowledge, the class distribution in which all classes have the same number of
observations is optimal. The authors modified the aforementioned progressive
samplingschemebycreatingtrainsetsateachanchorsuchthatallclasseshave
the same distribution. For anchors of sizes that would require more instances
ofaclassthanareavailableintheexistingdata,randominstancesofthatclass
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 41
are replicated until the class balance is established again. Note that while the
workisbasedonthefindingsbyWeissandProvost(2003)(cf.Sec.2.5.2),they
apply a different strategy. Instead of optimising over the class distribution for
agivenanchorsize,theytrytofindthestoppingpointunderthepremisethat
the training set will always be balanced.
Regardingthestoppingpointofiteration-wise curves,acommontechnique
is to separate some data that is not used for training but to compute an
iteration-wise curve online to detect convergence (Bishop, 1995).
Projective Approaches
A different idea to obtain the saturation point b was proposed by Leite and
sat
Brazdil (2003, 2004) through the notion of metalearning (Brazdil et al, 2022).
SimilartoProvostetal(1999),ageometricscheduleisused.Theassumptionis
thatwealreadyknowtheperformancesofthecurrentlearneratallanchorsin
the schedule on other datasets. The idea is to compute, on the target dataset,
theperformancesonlyfortheveryfirstanchorsandthentopredict thesatura-
tion point by aggregating the (known) saturation point on the k most similar
learning curves of the other datasets. The distance measure here is the sum
of differences between the curves at the initial anchors; the concrete anchors
used in their paper are (91, 128, 181, 256, ...), corresponding to the powers
of √2. The authors consider different aggregation measures such as mean and
minimum(LeiteandBrazdil,2003)andthemedian(LeiteandBrazdil,2004).
The authors discuss the potential issue that, among the k nearest neigh-
bour curves, some or even all of the curves can be substantially different from
the partial learning curve on the target dataset. Using the k nearest learning
curves to predict the stopping point would not work in such cases. Follow-up
work (Leite and Brazdil, 2007) proposes a remedy to this problem, in which
the curves are not used directly but are adjusted via a concept called curve
adaptation (discussed in Sec. 5.1.6).
5.1.5 Finding the Utility-Based Stopping Point
The problem of identifying the utility-based stopping point was, to our
knowledge, first addressed by Meek et al (2002) and was also independently
investigated by Weiss and Tian (2006). In these papers, a retrospective
approach is applied. The idea is similar to the aforementioned concept of pro-
gressive sampling (Provost et al, 1999), except that the analysis is done for
utilityratherthanlearningcurves.Incontrasttothelearningcurve,theutility
curve does not plateau but starts to deteriorate after its peak (see Fig. 4).
The main difficulty with the concept of utility in the context of learning
curvesistofindaunifyingscalefor(i)thecostsofdataacquisitionandtraining
time and (ii) the model performance. Meek et al (2002) avoid this problem by
adoptingthenotionofimplicitutilitythroughthecomparisonwithabaseline.
Theystopthealgorithmwhentheratiobetweenthebenefitimprovementand
the augmented runtime drops below a pre-defined threshold.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
42 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Incontrast,WeissandTian(2006)computeanexplicitutility,andthealgo-
rithm stops as soon as the observed utility decreases for the first time, which
istakenastheindicatorthattheutility-basedstoppingpointhasbeenpassed.
Theauthorsadopttheconceptofthenetutilityofapotentialclassifier,which
is the difference (in utility) between predictive performance (under a hypo-
thetical number of training instances) and the cost to acquire the (additional)
instances. Notably, the assumption is that the user has no control over the
instances for which labels will be acquired next, which contrasts the approach
from active learning. To merge different types of inconveniences (i.e., acquisi-
tion costs and prediction errors) into a single utility measure, the user has to
define costs per unit, e.g., costs for acquiring a single usable training instance
and costs for making a wrong prediction. Furthermore, the authors consider
the problem of deciding online whether or not to acquire more data and, in
the affirmative case, how many instances should be considered in the acquisi-
tion batch before reconsidering. The latter effectively corresponds to deciding
uponaprogressivesamplingscheme(Provostetal,1999).However,thepaper
doesnotanalysetheeffectsoffixedcostsperbatch(suchasthecomputational
costs of training a model), which implies that one could set batch sizes to 1
without consequence.
A consecutive version of that paper also adds the CPU cost for model
inductiontothecostsofapointonthelearningcurve (WeissandTian,2008).
The original paper only considered acquisition costs and the prediction error.
Thismodelalsoseemssuitableforiteration-wise curves,wheretherewouldbe
no data acquisition costs.
Inalloftheaboveapproaches,theusageoftheempiricallygatheredlearn-
ingcurvesfordecisionmakingisminimal.Moreover,theapproachesignoreall
except the last two points on the learning curve. In this sense, and in terms
ofthestoppingpointapproaches,theaboveworksareretrospectiveinnature.
No model of the learning curve is built, and no projections of errors on bigger
training sizes are made, which, for example, could make sense to predict that
thisutilitypeakeventwilloccurinthefutureorevenonlyinthenextiteration.
Last (2007) proposes such an approach, which we discuss in Sec. 5.2.2.
5.1.6 Performance Prediction at Fixed Point
The problem of predicting the learning curve value is naturally a regression
problem, where the goal is to predict µ for a fixed budget b. Essentially,
a,b
given a fixed learner a and the budget expressed in either observations n or
iterations t, it is about predicting (a,n) for sample-wise curves, and pre-
C
dicting (a,n,t) for sample-wise curves. The attributes are the performance
C
values at different (cheap) anchors and potentially additional contextualising
attributes. Using these attributes, one explicitly or implicitly generalises over
datasets orlearning algorithms (orboth).Modelsthatgeneraliseoverdatasets
are typically called meta-models and rather aim at model ranking (Brazdil
etal,2022;Ruhkopfetal,2023),whichwediscussinSec.5.1.2.Thisisbecause
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 43
it is difficult to generalise exact performance across datasets. When general-
ising over learners, one typically trains a single model for the target dataset,
trained from learning curves on the same dataset belonging to other learning
algorithms. Models that generalise over learners are typically called surrogate
models (Eggensperger et al, 2018).
We organise this section by how explicit the generalisation is made over
one of the two concepts. If no additional attributes are available, one implic-
itlyassumesthatallentriesinthedatabasearetoadegreesuitabletopredict
values in a new situation. There is no explicit context in this case, and we are
generalising implicitly over datasets or learners. Since no explicit contextual-
isation exists, those approaches can be used for both purposes, regardless of
their original purpose. In contrast, additional contextualising attributes can
describe the dataset, i.e., we have meta-features of the datasets available, or
they can describe the learning algorithms to which the learning curve values
belong. In principle, one could utilise both types of additional attributes, but
we are not aware of any approaches that adopt both.
Generalization Without Explicit Context
Generalisation from learning curves without explicit context means to pre-
dict the performance of a given learner on some dataset based on previously
acquired learning curves that are not equipped with additional information,
i.e., features describing the dataset or the algorithm used to produce them.
To justify the prediction model, the existing empirical learning curves either
stem from the same algorithm on other datasets, or other algorithms on the
same dataset. Either of these implicitly qualifies them to be relevant for the
new task. In other words, one simply uses a set of unannotated existing learn-
ing curves as aids to predict the behaviour of a new, only partially known,
learning curve.
Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) developed an approach that explicitly
used regression to predict the target performance without context. Probably
without noticing, the approach mainly re-invents the approaches previously
developed by Leite and Brazdil (2005, 2007, 2010); van Rijn et al (2015),
since it computes the most similar other learning curves in the portfolio and
obtains a prediction based on the average over those curves. The three dif-
ferences are that Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) (i) consider uncertainty
in the prediction based on the variance in the neighbourhood, (ii) adopt an
affinetransformation(insteadofalineartransformation)oftheexistinglearn-
ing curves and apply this before selecting the most similar ones, and (iii) that
theydonotuseafixedschedulebut,duetothefocusoniteration-wise curves,
simply a continuous schedule that is stopped as soon as there is enough evi-
dencethatthetargetperformancewillnotbebetterthanacurrentthreshold.
The Euclidean norm between the vectors describing the performances at the
anchors is used as the distance function between two curves.
ThereasonwhytheapproachisdiscussedhereandnotinSec.5.1.2together
with the others is subtle and worth being discussed. In both lines of research,
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
44 Learning Curves for Decision Making
targetperformancevaluesfromrelatedcurvesareaveragedtoestimatetheper-
formance of the current learner. However, Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017)
explicitly treat this as a performance prediction, which is then used for early
discardingbycomparingagainstathreshold.Incontrast,theworksintheline
of Leite and Brazdil (2005) do not treat this value as an actual prediction but
simply as some score used to order a pair or a set of learners.
While the approach generalises across algorithm configurations, it ignores
the configurations and generalises from learning curves without explicit con-
text. In other words, there is no reason why the approach could not be used
also for generalisation across datasets.
Cardona-Escobar et al (2017) presented an approach that predicts values
atall anchors.Theauthorsadoptaseriesofsupportvectorregressionmodels,
one for each anchor not evaluated so far. It is not entirely clear with which
data the models are trained, but we presume that it follows the same logic as
Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) and uses the fully known learning curves
of previously evaluated neural network configurations to do so. Interestingly,
similar to chaining (Gkioxari et al, 2016) in classification, they use as inputs
forthej-thfutureanchornotonlytheknownpartiallearningcurvevaluesbut
also use the predictions for the anchor points predicted before j.
Generalization With an Explicit Algorithm Context
Generalisationacrossalgorithmsonlyconsidersthetargetdatasetandassumes
that a number of (complete) empirical learning curves on that dataset are
already available for different algorithms. The explicit generalisation requires
that the previous learning curves are explicitly associated with features
describing the algorithm to which they belong.
Bakeretal(2018)proposeamethodthatusesfeaturesdescribingboth the
learning curve (including up to second-order differences) and the algorithm.
The approach predicts the performance of neural networks based on features
that describe the architecture (number of layers and weights) as well as the
hyperparameters of the learning algorithm (such as learning rate, learning
ratedecay,etc.).Theyadoptlinearandkernel-basedsupportvectorregression
machines,randomforests,andsimplelinearregressionbasedonordinaryleast
squares. Even though the authors suggest using kernel-based support vector
regressionmachines,theyfindthatsimplelinearregressionalsooftencompares
highly competitive for this prediction task.
Followingthisidea,Longetal(2020)additionallyaddtextualdescriptions
of the architecture to predict the learning curves of neural networks. Indeed,
thearchitecturedescriptionbyBakeretal(2018)israthersimplisticandonly
immediately well suited if all layers are of the same type, e.g., dense layers,
and have the same number of neurons. Long et al (2020) report substantial
performance improvements for convolutional network architectures compared
to the approach taken by Baker et al (2018).
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 45
5.1.7 Performance Bounding
Performanceboundingtriestogiveexplicitlowerorupperboundsontheper-
formance value at some specific or arbitrary budget. Answering this question
is essential to make high-confidence decisions on early discarding as discussed
in Sec. 4.1.3; formally, we denote it as (a, ). Typically, one is interested in
C ·
(a,b ), b being the size of the dataset intended for training or the limit
ref ref
C
performance of an iteration-wise curve, but the models we discuss here are
more general.
Performance bounding is intuitively a simpler problem than performance
prediction (Sec. 5.1.6), but there are usually also higher expectations with
respect to the accuracy of the assertion. When a performance bound is
expressed, one would expect that the true value is at least as high as specified
with high probability.
One approach that addresses this problem is Data Allocation using Upper
Bounds (DAUB) (Sabharwal et al, 2016). Given a set of configurations, it
first runs all configurations on two anchors of the dataset, effectively building
the initial segment of the learning curve. Based on this initial segment per
configuration,itdeterminesanoptimisticperformanceboundforeachlearning
curve that likely will not exceeded (i.e., an upper bound for measures that
need to be maximised, such as accuracy, and a lower bound for measures
that need to be minimised, such as error rate). This performance bound is
determined by calculating the linear regression slope of the last two segments.
The performance on the last anchor is extrapolated to the full size of the
dataset according to this slope. Therefore, there is an optimistic upper bound
on the performance that a configuration can obtain. After that, it goes into
thefollowingloop:Itrunsthemostpromisingconfigurationonalargersample
size and updates the performance bound. It reevaluates which configuration
has the most potential at that budget and assigns more budget to the most
promising configuration until one configuration has been run on the entire
dataset. Therefore, this is an example of horizontal model selection.
Alternatively, learning curve cross-validation uses a similar approach but
addresses this in a more flexible, vertical setting (Mohr and van Rijn, 2021,
2023). The method explicitly assumes that sample-wise curves have a convex
behaviour. The convexity of the curve allows for deriving a best-case extrap-
olation from a partial empirical learning curve. The convexity assumption is
used to linearly extrapolate the empirical learning curve and prune learners
when they can no longer improve on the best-known solution.
5.2 Approaches With Learning Curve Models
This section covers learning curve approaches that utilise an explicit model
to model the entire learning curve, as described in Sec. 3. Fig. 14 shows an
overview of all the approaches we discuss and how they cite each other. In the
base form, there is a model for a specific learner a that is able to predict the
performance (a, ) or (a,n, ) at any sample size or iteration respectively
C · C ·
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
46 Learning Curves for Decision Making
ApproachesWithExplicitLearningCurveModel
1993 1996 1999 2001 2003 2004 2005 2007 2009 2010 2012 2014 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024
Corte J s o e h t n a a l n ( d 19 L 9 a 3 n ) F g r l e e y y a (1 n 9 d 9 F 6) isher B (1 o 9 G o 9 n u 9 y ) M e a t n u u a k n l h t ( e a 2 r 0 j a e 0 n e 1 d ) e Z t e a e l p ( h 2 o 0 n 0 g 3 s ) ekul(2004 S ) ingh(2005) Last(2007) La H st es ( s 20 an 0 d 9) K W o e l i ac (2 h 0 i C n 1 a ( 0) a et , F a · ig l ) u ( e 2 r 0 o 1 a 2) et S a w l( e 2 rs 0 k 1 y 2 C ) et ( D · a , o l m · ( ) 2 h 0 a 1 n 4) etal K ( l 2 e 0 in 15 e ) t u al ( K ( C C 2 l 0 e a ( i r 1 a n d 7 o , a e n ) t · a ) a - ) E l( s W 2 co 0 i b 1 st a 7 u r b b ) e a t R a i a c n l h d ( t 2 e P 0 r e 1 a d 7 n a ) d pa K ti ho (2 sh 01 g 9 o ) fta K ar os ( h 2 u 0 t 1 e 9 A ) et dr a ia l e ( n 2 s 0 e 2 n 1) etal E (2 g 0 e 2 le 3) et K a ie l l ( h 2 o¨ 0 fe 2 r 4) etal(2024)
Fig. 14:Citationsacrossapproacheswithalearningcurvemodel.Thecolours
indicatethequestionaddressedaboutlearningcurves.Normalarrowsindicate
that the paper cited the other paper, and coloured arrows indicate an experi-
mental comparison with previous approaches.
(yellow), discussed in Sec. 5.2.1. On top of such curves, a utility curve
U
can be defined (green), discussed in Sec. 5.2.2. Finally, the curve models can
even generalise across the learners, leading to generalised curve models (, )
C · ·
(beige). One additional benefit of these types of models is that they can also
performmodelacquisition,i.e.,assesstheperformanceofalearnerforwhichwe
havenoperformanceevaluationsyet.ThesemodelsarediscussedinSec.5.2.3.
In this section, we describe the learning curve model according to the
notion of budget, using the variable b to avoid having to distinguish between
sample sizes n or iterations t. In the spirit of Sec. 3, we use the notation
f(a,b) to refer to the original random variable that generates observations
of the performance of learner a at budget b (independently of whether f
here is a sample-wise curve with b being the sample size or whether f is an
iteration-wise curve with some implicit sample size n and b being the itera-
tion). Accordingly, µ =E[f(a,b)] is the mean value of the curve of learner
a,b
a at budget b.
5.2.1 Performance Prediction at Any Point
We will discuss approaches that build a full learning curve model ˆf (b) for a
a
specific learner a. That is, they model the curve mean µ for a fixed learner
a,b
a at any budget b (effectively modelling µ ). We divide the approaches
a,
into three groups, corresponding to the three m · odel types for ˆf discussed in
Sec. 3, which are also reflected in the three layers of Fig. 10. Accordingly,
we first discuss approaches that provide point estimates of the curve, i.e.,
ˆf :N R, then approaches that explicitly treat those estimates with uncer-
a
tainty → and introduce a notion of bounds on them, i.e., ˆf : N R2, and
a
→
finally approaches that create entire probabilistic belief models over curves,
i.e., ˆf :N p p is a distribution of a real-valued random variable .
a
→{ | }
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 47
Point Estimates
To our knowledge, the first approach that used observed data to fit a learn-
ing curve model was presented by Cortes et al (1993). In that paper, the
three-parametric inverse power law shown in Eq. (6) was used to build an
iteration-wise curve. The usage of the power law model is justified with the
findings in the statistical mechanic framework (Seung et al, 1992) and used
to predict the predictive performance on the complete dataset (for two neural
networkarchitecturesontheNISTdataset).Theauthorsfindthatthepredic-
tive performance on 60k instances can be almost perfectly predicted using the
inverse power law. Unfortunately, it is not entirely clear on which anchors the
estimates are built. Notably, this is the only paper we are aware of that fits
both a train- and test-error curve. The paper reports some information about
noise through boxplots on the curve but does not explicitly incorporate them
into the model.
JohnandLangley(1996)proposedasimilarapproach.Similartothework
of Cortes et al (1993), the model is used to estimate the performance of a
learner on the complete dataset with the goal of stopping the training proce-
dureearly.Onedifferenceisthatthemodelisadoptedforasample-wise curve
insteadofaniteration-wise curve.Concerningconvergencedetection,Johnand
Langley (1996) employ the Probably Close Enough criterion, which detects
convergence if the probability that the accuracy of a model trained on the
complete dataset will be at most some ε worse than the current model’s per-
formance is less than some δ. However, the paper itself then does not adopt
a notion of probabilities but stops if the performance on the complete dataset
predicted by an inverse power law model is not by at least ε better than
the currently observed performance; they call the approach Extrapolation of
Learning Curves. In other words, the uncertainty is not quantified.
The inverse power law has been used in many applications. For example,
several approaches have used the inverse power law to model the performance
ofneuralnetworksindifferentdomains(Alwosheeletal,2018;Choetal,2015).
It is noteworthy that recent works show evidence against the usage of any
commonly used models for neural networks, at least in the initial parts of the
curve,duetothe(sample-wise)doubledescent(Nakkiranetal,2020).Atleast
for certain combinations of architectures, datasets, and training procedures,
there is empirical evidence that the learning curve exhibits non-monotonic
behaviour,whichcontradictsallexistinglearningcurvemodelsliketheinverse
power law model.
Range Estimates
Mukherjee et al (2003) built inverse power law models in the domain of DNA
data.Themaincontributionofthatpaperistoanalysetheappropriatenessof
theinversepowermodeloneightmedicaldatasets.Tothisend,theyconstruct
uncertainty bounds around the mean learning curve consisting of the q25 and
q75 curves fitted from those statistics, respectively. This way, a learning curve
model including information about dispersion is obtained. Experiments are
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
48 Learning Curves for Decision Making
conductedforasupportvectormachineoneightmedicaldatasetsinwhichthe
leave-one-out validation result (estimate of the learning curve on d 1 data
| |−
points for training) is compared to the boundaries suggested by the model.
Having an explicit model for the q25 and q75 curves, one can obtain for an
arbitrary anchor b not only a point estimate of µ but an estimate of the
a,b
inter-quartile range of f(a,b) itself, which is arguably more informative given
that, assuming Gaussian noise, the interval should also contain µ .
a,b
Figueroa et al (2012) modify the aforementioned approach in two ways.
First, different anchors are associated with different weights, usually to assign
higher weights to larger anchors since they are more informative. Second,
implicitlyassumingastandardGaussiandistributionoftheobservationsasin
Eq. (5), they compute a 95% confidence interval to describe the uncertainty
rather than the interquartile range. Based on this information, for a query
pointb,theypredictaconfidenceintervalinsteadofapointestimate.Figueroa
etal(2012)alsoappliedthisapproachtomedicaldata,justasMaoetal(2016)
for EEG data. More recently, it was also successfully used for sensor commu-
nication (Oyedare and Park, 2019). This work aims to predict a reasonable
sample size, which is perhaps more reasonably addressed by the utility-based
approaches discussed in Sec. 5.1.5.
Recently, Koshute et al (2021) have used the inverse power law to predict
the minimum anchor point on which a learner must be trained to reach near-
p performancewithagivendesired confidence.Thisapproachcanbeseenas
sat
a combination of the above two approaches. Similar to Figueroa et al (2012),
they compute the confidence interval at all anchors. However, instead of using
thesetoestimateconfidenceintervalsatarbitrarypoints,theyfitasinglecurve
on the lower bounds of the confidence intervals at the known anchors. The
resulting model is not used to make predictions on arbitrary anchors but to
compute the cheapest anchor that will obtain with a pre-defined probability
(size of confidence-interval) a performance that is ε-close to p , where ε is a
sat
hyperparameter controlled by the user.
Theideaofcomputingconfidenceintervalsisalsoadoptedbylearningcurve
cross-validation (Mohr and van Rijn, 2021, 2023). A Morgan-Mercer-Flodin
model is created to decide whether or not to skip intermediate anchors and
evaluate the learner on the full dataset size. However, the confidence intervals
are used differently than in the above cases and are not used for the inverse
powerlawmodelitself.Incontrast,theconfidenceboundsareusedtocompute
the range of possible slopes of the learning curve between two anchors.
Distribution Estimates
The first approach to predict distribution estimates for any anchor point was
presented by Domhan et al (2015). The approach assumes learning curves to
be instances of a parametric model that is a linear combination of known
model classes, such as the inverse power law, and others (Gu et al, 2001).
Themaindifferencetotheaboveapproachesisthat,insteadofestimatingthe
parameters through a maximum likelihood approach, they estimate, for each
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 49
parameter, the whole posterior distribution adopting Monte-Carlo Markov
Chains (MCMC). The approach is successfully used to early discard neural
network architectures by predicting the saturation performance p of an
sat
iteration-wise curve,therebydiscardinglearnersassoonastheprobabilitythat
itiscompetitivedropsbelowapre-definedthreshold.TheBayesianmodelpro-
posed by Domhan et al (2015) also explicitly estimates the noise σ2 , which
a,b
is assumed to be homoscedastic, i.e., identical for all budgets b. In this sense,
the approach quantifies both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty (cf. Sec. 3).
A recent alternative for estimating distributions has been proposed by
Adriaensen et al (2023) through the notion of prior fitted neural networks
(PFN)(Hollmannetal,2023).BasedontheapproachbyDomhanetal(2015),
Adriaensen et al (2023) consider a set of basis functions, over which they
define a prior. They then sample a large number of curves from this prior
and train a variation of a transformer neural network with it, which is able
to predict distributions for a target anchor based on a partial learning curve.
Since no sampling from the posterior is required anymore, compared to the
MCMC approach by Domhan et al (2015), predictions can be obtained much
faster,andtheauthorsclaimthatthepredictionperformanceiscomparableor
evenbetter,whichcouldhowevernotbeconfirmedinsubsequentexperiments
discussed below.
The latest approach we are aware of is the robust estimation RoBER
presented by Egele et al (2024). The approach follows the idea of MCMC
introducedbyDomhanetal(2015)butappliesadifferentsamplingalgorithm
to obtain more stable estimates. The results suggest that classical learn-
ing extrapolation significantly outperforms PFN-based extrapolations at the
current state of research.
5.2.2 Utility Prediction at Any Point
Utility prediction combines learning curve models as discussed in Sec. 5.2.1
with utility models as discussed in Sec. 5.1.5. The learning curve model ˆf is
used as a basis to estimate the performance at any point, and the utility at
budget b is then computed as a function of the modelled performanceˆf (b) at
a
and the associated costs for budget b.
The first approach in this direction was presented by Last (2007). This
work is very similar to the works of Weiss and Tian (2006) but makes util-
ity forecasts rather than looking back. Therefore, it is projective instead of
retrospective. The error rate that serves as input to the model is obtained
from a parametric model (i.e., a power-law) trained on the empirical values
obtained at earlier budgets. This framework enables one to analytically com-
pute the optimal dataset size. The main advantage of the approach over the
one of Weiss and Tian (2006) is that one does not need to go through sev-
eral acquisition iterations, which is a benefit if those are associated with fixed
costs. Therefore, the learning curve has become a resource for decision mak-
ing.Whilethisworkassumestheempiricallearningcurvetobeavailable,Last
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
50 Learning Curves for Decision Making
(2009) embeds his idea into an algorithm that follows a progressive sampling
scheme in a follow-up work.
One use case in which the above techniques have been adopted has been
reported in the context of automated software configuration (Sarkar et al,
2015). The context of that paper is that every instance is a parametrisation
of a software library, and obtaining its label requires the costly execution of
a benchmark on such a configuration. The goal is to understand how many
observations must be acquired to learn a reliable prediction model. To this
end,theauthorsadopttheprojectivesamplingapproachofLast(2007,2009).
The latter work raises an important issue by stating that knowing the
saturationpointis(often)notenough.Instead,weoftenalsoneed toknowthe
performance at the saturation point. Sarkar et al (2015) argue that if the user
is unaware of the expected performance at that point, substantial resources
might be required to obtain the observations to reach the saturation point.
However,iftheactualperformanceatthatpointisknowntobemediocre,the
user could anticipate this and not invest the required resources. To this end,
they also incorporate the utility model proposed by Weiss and Tian (2008).
5.2.3 Performance at Any Point for Any Learner
The approaches discussed in this section are the most general ones developed
todate regardinglearning curves inthat theycreate amodel forthe complete
function ,i.e.,generalisingbothoverbothbudgetsandlearners.Suchamodel
C
is so versatile that it can be used in all types of decision-making situations,
e.g.,dataacquisition,earlystopping,andearlydiscarding.Additionally,these
can be used for model acquisition (selecting a yet unseen promising model).
Freeze-thawBayesianoptimisationmodelsthebehaviouroflearningcurves
through Gaussian processes (Swersky et al, 2014). An important contribution
of that work is a non-stationary kernel for Gaussian processes that supports
exponentially decaying learning curve models; it can easily be checked that
standard kernels like a linear or Gaussian kernel do not lead to meaning-
ful learning curve models. Assuming that the kernel reflects the model class
appropriately, one additional benefit of using a Gaussian process is that one
automatically obtains estimates for the noise σ2 at an arbitrary anchor b.
a,b
Using their kernel and the current set of observations, Swersky et al (2014)
estimate the asymptotic mean performance p . Since the learning curves are
sat
combined with Bayesian optimisation, the uncertainty for a specific future
anchor is one of the required inputs for computing their acquisition func-
tion. In a rather thin evaluation, the approach was successfully applied to
Online Latent Dirichlet Allocation, Logistic Regression, and Probabilistic
Matrix Factorization, considering one dataset per learner. While the paper
focused on iteration-wise curves, the modelling technique can also be used for
sample-wise curves.
Klein et al (2017a) presented a similar approach dubbed FABOLAS. Simi-
lar to Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisaion, a Gaussian process is used to model
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 51
the learning curve of the learners across different hyperparameter configura-
tions. There are three main differences between the two approaches as far as
learningcurvesareconcerned.First,FABOLASconsiderssample-wise curves,
while freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation considers iteration-wise curves. Sec-
ond, and related to this, FABOLAS uses a kernel different from freeze-thaw
Bayesian optimisation to model the behaviour of the learning curve using the
Gaussianprocess,whichisdefinedbytherelativedatasetsizein[0,1]insteadof
absolutesizes.Third,FABOLAStriestoexplicitlylearnthecompletelearning
curve, while freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation focuses only on the saturation
performance. Similar to freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation, the uncertainty
about the performance estimates of the learning curve is not explicitly used.
Still, the fact that a Gaussian process is fitted from the data allows one to
make assertions about the certainty of the learning curve value at any point.
Parallel to their work on FABOLAS, Klein et al (2017b) proposed an
approach to estimate both the mean and the noise (aleatoric uncertainty) of
a learning curve through the notion of Bayesian neural networks. The neu-
ral network predicts the parameters of a set of basis functions. These basis
functions incorporate prior knowledge into the network, which is necessary to
extrapolate away from the data. The main difference between this approach
andtheaforementionedapproachesisthatthisapproachmodelsthebehaviour
of the learning curve through a neural network. This network has d+1 input
units (d for the algorithm description and one for the anchor), one output
unit for the estimated performance and, optionally, one output unit for the
estimate of the variance of the performance (which relates to aleatoric uncer-
tainty).Toourknowledge,thisapproachandthelearningcurveextrapolation
proposed by Domhan et al (2015) are the only approaches in this area that
explicitly model the variance of the performance of the learning curve (i.e.,
which can also be seen as noise). An important difference between the two is
that Klein et al (2017b) assume heteroscedastic noise, i.e., noise that changes
with both different hyperparameters and anchors, while Domhan et al (2015)
assume homoscedastic noise across anchor sizes (not across configurations,
becausethemodeldoesnotgeneraliseoverdifferentconfigurations).Whilethe
approach presented in the paper does not explicitly consider the uncertainty
about the parameter estimates, the parameters are essentially sampled from
a posterior distribution. Therefore, the uncertainty is at least implicitly avail-
able. However, it should be noted that the number of parameters describing
the model here, namely the network weights, is potentially much larger than
in the approach taken by Domhan et al (2015).
Wistuba and Pedapati (2019) propose to use biased matrix factorisation
to model (, ). The approach is settled in the context of neural architecture
C · ·
search. Knowledge from previous datasets and different architectures is used
to estimate the performance of new architectures on the target dataset, and
this estimate is used to drive a Bayesian optimisation approach.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
52 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Table 1: Overview of the discussed learning curve approaches, ordered along
the most general question they address, the learning curve type and the data
resourcesused(4columns).Intheheader,‘LC’standsforlearningcurve,‘DS’
stands for dataset, and ‘AL’ stands for algorithm. All of them use partial
empiricalcurvesonthetargetdatasetofthecurrentlearner(s).Estimatetype:
p,r,d are point, range and distribution estimates, respectively.
Question Type
SDrehtoCL
.taeF-ateMSD
LArehtoCL
.taeF-ateMLA
ytilitU
epyTetamitsE
Contributions
p >τ obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Van den Bosch (2004); Jamieson and Talwalkar (2016);
ref
Petrak(2000);ZengandLuo(2017)
p >τ both ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Lietal(2017)
ref
π a∈A obs. ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ p LeiteandBrazdil(2005,2007);vanRijnetal(2015)
π a∈A obs. ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ p LeiteandBrazdil(2008,2010)
π a∈A both ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Ruhkopfetal(2023)
bsat iter. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Bishop(1995)
bsat obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p John and Langley (1996); Ng and Dash (2006); Provost
etal(1999)
bsat obs. ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p LeiteandBrazdil(2003,2004)
p obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Cortesetal(1994)
lim
bu obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Meeketal(2002)
sat
bu obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ p WeissandTian(2006,2008)
sat
C(a,dtr ) obs. ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ r ChandrashekaranandLane(2017)
C(a,dtr ) iter. ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ p Bakeretal(2018)
C(a,·) obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Sabharwaletal(2016)
C(a,·) obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ r MohrandvanRijn(2023)
C(a,·) iter. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Cortesetal(1993)
C(a,·) obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p BoonyanuntaandZeephongsekul(2004);FreyandFisher
(1999); Gu et al (2001); Hess and Wei (2010); John
and Langley (1996); Kolachina et al (2012); Richter and
Khoshgoftaar(2019);Singh(2005)
C(a,·) obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ r Figueroa et al (2012); Koshute et al (2021); Mukherjee
etal(2003)
C(a,·) iter. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ d Domhanetal(2015)
C(a,·) obs. ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Cardona-Escobaretal(2017)
C(a,·) both ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ d Adriaensenetal(2023)
C(a,·) both ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ d Egeleetal(2024)
C(a,·) obs. ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Kielho¨feretal(2024)
U(a,·) obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ p Last(2007,2009)
C(·,·) both ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ d Kleinetal(2017b);Swerskyetal(2014)
C(·,·) obs. ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ d Kleinetal(2017a)
C(·,·) both ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ d WistubaandPedapati(2019)
6 Summary and Open Research Directions
Learning curves have been a vital resource for decision making in machine
learningforseveraldecades,andtheyhavegainedsignificantattentionoverthe
last years. Learning curves have proven to be a suitable solution for different
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 53
types of decision-making situations, i.e., data acquisition, early stopping, and
early discarding for model selection.
We have provided a formal definition of various types of learning curves
(Sec. 2). There are two predominant types of learning curves in the machine
learning literature, i.e.: the sample-wise curve (i.e., the type of learning curve
that one obtains when giving a learner more training instances) and the
iteration-wise curve (i.e., the type of learning curve that one obtains when
allowing an algorithm to process the data multiple times, see for example the
number of epochs of a neural network). While both types of learning curves
seem similar, they have distinct semantic meanings and characteristics. Both
typesoflearningcurvescanbeextendedtoautilitycurve,whichconsidersthe
costofcomputationalresourcesordataacquisition.Additionally,wehavecon-
trasted these against other types of (learning) curves, such as feature curves,
capacity curves, and curves obtained by data-centric models, such as active
learning or curriculum learning.
Wehavedescribedthebasicconceptsofmodellingalearningcurve(Sec.3).
Therearevariousparametricmodelsthatincorporatedomainknowledgeabout
what we already know about the shape of learning curves (e.g., the three-
parameter inverse power law-model). Even when the performance of a learner
is observed at very few anchors, the learning curve can already be extrapo-
lated to make predictions about larger anchors. Additionally, one can decide
to also model a degree of uncertainty, either as a range estimate or as a
distribution. We distinguish between two types of uncertainty, i.e., epistemic
uncertainty and aleatoric uncertainty, and relate these concepts to the lit-
erature on modelling learning curves. Typically, when uncertainty is being
modelled, the epistemic uncertainty is being modelled, but in some cases, the
aleatoric uncertainty is being modelled (see, e.g., Klein et al, 2017b).
We have provided a unified framework for methods that utilise learn-
ing curves for decision making in machine learning (Sec. 4). This framework
categorises these methods along three axes: the decision situation that they
address, the questions that can be addressed with learning curves, and the
dataresourcesthatcanbeusedtomodelthelearningcurves.Notably,Fig.10
shows an overview of all questions that can be addressed by learning curves.
There are various ways to address decision situations with learning curves; for
example, questions about the saturation point of a given learner or whether
a learner will perform better than another learner at a given amount of data.
These questions can be further generalised, eventually ranging in complexity
from binary questions to questions that address how any learner behaves at
any budget.
Wehavedoneanextensiveliteraturesurvey,categorisingalllearningcurve
methods that we are aware of into this framework (Sec. 5). Table 1 shows an
overviewofthemethodswehavediscussedinthissurvey,contextualisingthem
according to these criteria. This table can be seen as an extension of Fig. 12.
Based on this literature survey, we describe several directions for future work.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
54 Learning Curves for Decision Making
More experimental databases for learning curve research to sup-
port the full complexity of learning curve methods. Doing relevant
research on learning curves requires extensive computing power. Exploring a
sample-wise curveinherentlyrequiresmanymodelstorestartthelearningpro-
cess at different anchors, whereas exploring an iteration-wise curve is often
doneonneuralnetworksthatcomewiththeirdistinctlayersofcomplexity(see,
e.g., White et al, 2023). A common way to address this is by experimental
databases or surrogate benchmarks that store certain experimental results.
Thisallowsforfastexperimentationand,therefore,fasterdevelopmentcycles.
While several of these experimental databases for learning curves exist (as
outlined in Sec. 2.2), these currently do not capture the full scale of learning
curves resources or questions that can be answered using learning curves.
A quantitative benchmark on learning curve extrapolation meth-
ods.Manymodelshavebeenproposedtoextrapolatelearningcurvesandmake
predictions about the performance of a learning at a higher budget (see, e.g.,
Guetal,2001).However,thesemodelshaveonlybeensubjecttolimitedcom-
parison. While Gu et al (2001) compared various parametric models against
each other, and Kielh¨ofer et al (2024) compared a representative parametric
model against a representative metalearning model across many different set-
tings, more research is needed. Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 already show that, while
manypapersareawareofothermethodsandcitethosemethods(greyarrows),
only very few actively compare against each other (blue arrows). Moreover,
manyoftheselearningcurvemodelsareusedasasmallcomponentinalarger
system, e.g., an AutoML system. In such a case, the predictive performance
of the learning curve model might not even be measured, as eventually, one
often measures the quality of the complete system; in the case of an AutoML
system, the performance of the final selected model. Due to this modular
nature, improvements on the learning curve extrapolation method would then
be orthogonal to improvements on the AutoML system.
Tighter integration of learning curve extrapolation methods with
AutoML systems. We already noted a clear opportunity for AutoML sys-
tems in Sec. 4.1.3. In situations where multiple learners are being compared
against each other, the training set needs to be further split into an actual
training set and a validation set to select the best learner to be tested on the
test set (which can only be seen once). The existence of this validation set
already shows an opportunity for learning curve methods; while a learner is
being selected based on its performance after being trained on the split-off
trainingset,whatisrelevantisitsperformanceafterbeingtrainedontheorig-
inal training set (i.e., the split-off training set plus validation set). It is not
necessarily the case that the same learner performs best on both. Learning
curve extrapolation models can predict which learner will eventually perform
best on an anchor of the size of the original training set.
Morelearningcurvemethodsthatoperateonlow-levelquestions.
A prominent question that arises from the literature survey is whether sim-
ple questions can be treated more simplistically. Fig. 10 shows four binary
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 55
questions. While approaches aim to answer these questions, most do so by
implicitly answering a more difficult question (see Table 1 and Fig. 12). Some
ofthesequestionsarereallyatthecoreofthediscussedapproaches.Forexam-
ple, will the learning curve intersect with the learning curve of the currently
best model? Most approaches create a learning curve model for this, implic-
itlysolvingamuchmoredifficultproblem.Whilethosemodels,ifappropriate,
havethepotentialtoprovideadditionalinterestinginsights,thequestionarises
whether simpler approaches could reliably solve those problems while needing
much less online data. Approaches that remain faithful to this question level
(suchassuccessivehalvingandhyperband)haveproveneffectiveandreceived
considerable attention. Additionally, we see a clear opportunity for incorpo-
rating uncertainty into methods that address the binary question, effectively
providing the chance that a particular learner will be better than another
learning at a given budget.
A learning curve method that makes use of all types of data
resources.Learningcurvemethodscanmakeuseofvariousresourcestomodel
the learning curve (see Fig 11). For example, the inverse power law model
uses the current learner’s learning curve on the same dataset. In contrast,
metalearningmodelsoftenalsomakeuseoflearningcurvesofeitherthecurrent
learner or other learners on other datasets (see, e.g., Leite and Brazdil, 2005).
A reasonable assumption is that the methods that utilise more types of data
resourceswouldbemoreaccurate.Table1revealsthatnolearningcurvemodel
utilises all types of data resources. Indeed, combining anchors across learners
and datasets might be a complex task, but when this is done successfully, it
will enormously increase our understanding of learning curves.
Acknowledgements.
We thank Pavel Brazdil, Isabelle Guyon, Aaron Klein, and Marco Loog for
their insightful discussions and feedback on this survey.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
56 Learning Curves for Decision Making
A Notation
Table 2 contains an overview of the notation used throughout this paper.
Table 2: Overview of notation.
term description
D Thespaceofallpossibledatasets
d Aninstantiationofadataset
dtr The instances from a given dataset based upon which a given hypothesis h
istrained
X Thespaceofallpossibleinputvaluesforagivendatasetd
Y Thespaceofallpossiblelabelsofagivendatasetd
H Thespacethatagivenmodelorhypothesishcantake
h Modelorhypothesish,inducedbasedonagiventrainsetdtr
a Analgorithmthatgivenatrainingsetdtr inducesahypothesish
A Setofallpossiblelearnersunderconsideration
Rout The theoretical performance of a hypothesis under the true distribution of
thedata(notethatthistruedistributionistypicallyunknown)
Rin Theempiricalriskofahypothesisundersomesampled (i.e.,adataset)from
thetruedistribution
C (a,n) true mean performance of learner a when trained on n samples (related to
observationlearningcurve)
C (a,n,t) true mean performance of learner a when trained on n samples with t
iterations(relatedtoiterationlearningcurve)
f(a,b) The performance of a given learner a trained on a dataset of sample size b
(in case of observation curve) or iteration b (in case of iteration curve). In
contrasttoC.f(a,b)isarandom variable withC asmeanvalue
µ Themeanoff(a,b)
a,b
σ2 Thevarianceoff(a,b)
a,b
O Setofperformanceobservationsfromanchorsofhistoriclearningcurves,pos-
sibly for different learners, e.g., O = {(a1,b1),(a2,b2),(a3,b3),...}, where
ai arelearnersandbj arebudgets.
ˆf(a,b) Theperformanceestimatedbyalearningcurvemodelforlearneraatbudget
b.Maybeapoint,range,ordistributionalestimate.
ˆfa(b) Theperformanceestimatedbyalearningcurvemodelforlearneraatbudget
b ifthemodeldoesnotgeneralizeacrosslearners.Maybeapoint,range,or
distributionalestimate.
n anchorsize,indicatingthesizeofasubsampleofthedataset
t number of iterations, e.g., in the case of neural networks, the number of
epochs
b generic symbol for an anchor, stands either for n or t, depending on the
context.
bsat Theanchorsizeatwhichtheperformanceofalearnersaturates
psat Theperformanceofthelearneratthesaturationpoint
bu The anchor size at which the utility (a performance measure divided by a
sat
costmeasure)ismaximized
b Usedintheframeworkforthebinaryquestionasathresholdonthebudget
ref
p Used in the framework for the binary question as a threshold on the
ref
performance
θ Theparametersofaparametricfunction,forexample,theparametersofthe
IPL-modelare(α,β,γ)
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 57
Declarations
Funding. Felix Mohr was supported through the project ING-312-2023 from
Universidad de La Sabana.
Conflicts of interest. Not Applicable
Ethics approval. Not Applicable
Consent to participate. Not Applicable
Consent for publication. Not Applicable
Availability of data and material. Not Applicable
Code availability. Not Applicable
Authors’ contributions. Both authors were involved in the redaction of all
parts of the document. F.M. had the lead in all sections; J.N.v.R. contributed
to all sections by actively writing and critically reviewing the text.
References
AdriaensenS,RakotoarisonH,Mu¨llerS,etal(2023)Efficientbayesianlearning
curveextrapolationusingprior-datafittednetworks.In:AdvancesinNeural
Information Processing Systems 36, pp 19,858–19,886
Alwosheel A, van Cranenburgh S, Chorus CG (2018) Is your dataset big
enough? sample size requirements when using artificial neural networks for
discrete choice analysis. Journal of choice modelling 28:167–182
AmariS,MurataN(1993)Statisticaltheoryoflearningcurvesunderentropic
loss criterion. Neural Computation 5(1):140–153
Baker B, Gupta O, Raskar R, et al (2018) Accelerating neural architecture
search using performance prediction. In: 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR’18
Beleites C, Neugebauer U, Bocklitz T, et al (2013) Sample size planning for
classification models. Analytica chimica acta 760:25–33
BifetA,Gavald`aR,HolmesG,etal(2018)Machinelearningfordatastreams:
with practical examples in MOA. MIT press
Bishop C (1995) Regularization and complexity control in feed-forward
networks. In: Proceedings International Conference on Artificial Neural
Networks ICANN’95, pp 141–148
Boonyanunta N, Zeephongsekul P (2004) Predicting the relationship between
the size of training sample and the predictive power of classifiers. In:
Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems, 8th
International Conference, KES 2004. pp 529–535
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
58 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Bornschein J, Visin F, Osindero S (2020) Small data, big decisions: Model
selectioninthesmall-dataregime.In:Proceedingsofthe37thInternational
Conference on Machine Learning. pp 1035–1044
Van den Bosch A (2004) Wrapped progressive sampling search for optimizing
learning algorithm parameters. In: Proceedings of the 16th Belgian-Dutch
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 219–226
Brazdil P, van Rijn JN, Soares C, et al (2022) Metalearning: Applications to
Automated Machine Learning and Data Mining, 2nd edn. Springer
Cardona-Escobar AF, Giraldo-Forero AF, Castro-Ospina AE, et al (2017)
Efficient hyperparameter optimization in convolutional neural networks
by learning curves prediction. In: Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image
Analysis, Computer Vision, and Applications. pp 143–151
Chandrashekaran A, Lane IR (2017) Speeding up hyper-parameter optimiza-
tion by extrapolation of learning curves using previous builds. In: Machine
Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases - European Conference,
ECML PKDD 2017. pp 477–492
Cho J, Lee K, Shin E, et al (2015) How much data is needed to train a medi-
cal image deep learning system to achieve necessary high accuracy? CoRR
abs/1511.06348. https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06348
CortesC,JackelLD,SollaSA,etal(1993)Learningcurves:Asymptoticvalues
and rate of convergence. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 6. pp 327–334
Cortes C, Jackel LD, Chiang W (1994) Limits in learning machine accuracy
imposed by data quality. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 7. pp 239–246
da Costa FG, Rios RA, de Mello RF (2016) Using dynamical systems tools
to detect concept drift in data streams. Expert Systems with Applications
60:39–50
Domhan T, Springenberg JT, Hutter F (2015) Speeding up automatic hyper-
parameteroptimizationofdeepneuralnetworksbyextrapolationoflearning
curves.In:ProceedingsoftheTwenty-FourthInternationalJointConference
on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2015. pp 3460–3468
Domingos P, Hulten G (2000) Mining High-Speed Data Streams. In: Proceed-
ings of the sixth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, pp 71–80
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 59
Dong X, Yang Y (2020) Nas-bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible
neural architecture search. In: 8th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2020
EgeleR,MohrF,VieringT,etal(2024)Theunreasonableeffectivenessofearly
discarding after one epoch in neural network hyperparameter optimization.
Neurocomputing 597:127,964
Eggensperger K, Lindauer M, Hoos HH, et al (2018) Efficient benchmarking
of algorithm configurators via model-based surrogates. Machine Learning
107(1):15–41
Eggensperger K, Mu¨ller P, Mallik N, et al (2021) HPOBench: A collection
of reproducible multi-fidelity benchmark problems for HPO. In: Proceed-
ings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and
Benchmarks
Figueroa RL, Zeng-Treitler Q, Kandula S, et al (2012) Predicting sample size
requiredforclassificationperformance.BMCMedicalInformaticsDecisMak
12:8
Fine T, Mukherjee S (1999) Parameter convergence and learning curves for
neural networks. Neural Comput 11(3):747–769
FormanG,CohenI(2004)Learningfromlittle:Comparisonofclassifiersgiven
little training. In: Knowledge Discovery in Databases: PKDD 2004, 8th
EuropeanConferenceonPrinciplesandPracticeofKnowledgeDiscoveryin
Databases. pp 161–172
FreyLJ,FisherDH(1999)Modelingdecisiontreeperformancewiththepower
law. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 1999
Fu¨rnkranzJ,PetrakJ(2001)Anevaluationoflandmarkingvariants.In:Work-
ing Notes of the ECML/PKDD 2000 Workshop on Integrating Aspects of
Data Mining, Decision Support and Meta-Learning, pp 57–68
GkioxariG,ToshevA,JaitlyN(2016)Chainedpredictionsusingconvolutional
neural networks. In: Leibe B, Matas J, Sebe N, et al (eds) Computer Vision
- ECCV 2016 - 14th European Conference. pp 728–743
Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A (2016) Deep Learning. MIT Press, http:
//www.deeplearningbook.org
Gu B, Hu F, Liu H (2001) Modelling classification performance for large
data sets. In: Advances in Web-Age Information Management, Second
International Conference, WAIM 2001. pp 317–328
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
60 Learning Curves for Decision Making
HessKR,WeiC(2010)Learningcurvesinclassificationwithmicroarraydata.
Seminars in oncology 37(1):65–68
Hollmann N, Mu¨ller S, Eggensperger K, et al (2023) Tabpfn: A transformer
that solves small tabular classification problems in a second. In: The
EleventhInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations,ICLR2023
Hughes GF (1968) On the mean accuracy of statistical pattern recognizers.
IEEE Trans Inf Theory 14(1):55–63
Hu¨llermeier E, Waegeman W (2021) Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty
in machine learning: an introduction to concepts and methods. Machine
Learning 110(3):457–506
Jamieson KG, Talwalkar A (2016) Non-stochastic best arm identification
and hyperparameter optimization. In: Proceedings of the 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2016.
pp 240–248
John GH, Langley P (1996) Static versus dynamic sampling for data min-
ing. In: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-96). pp 367–370
Kielh¨ofer L, Mohr F, van Rijn JN (2024) Learning curve extrapolation meth-
ods across extrapolation settings. In: Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis
XXII. pp 145–157
Klein A, Falkner S, Bartels S, et al (2017a) Fast bayesian optimization of
machine learning hyperparameters on large datasets. In: Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
AISTATS 2017. pp 528–536
Klein A, Falkner S, Springenberg JT, et al (2017b) Learning curve prediction
withbayesianneuralnetworks.In:5thInternationalConferenceonLearning
Representations, ICLR’17
Kolachina P, Cancedda N, Dymetman M, et al (2012) Prediction of learning
curves in machine translation. In: Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of the
Conference. pp 22–30
Koshute P, Zook J, McCulloh I (2021) Recommending training set sizes for
classification. CoRR abs/2102.09382. https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.09382
Last M (2007) Predicting and optimizing classifier utility with the power law.
In: Workshops Proceedings of the 7th IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining (ICDM 2007). pp 219–224
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 61
LastM(2009)Improvingdataminingutilitywithprojectivesampling.In:Pro-
ceedingsofthe15thACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. pp 487–496
Leite R, Brazdil P (2003) Improving progressive sampling via meta-learning.
In: Progress in Artificial Intelligence, 11th Protuguese Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, EPIA 2003. pp 313–323
Leite R, Brazdil P (2004) Improving progressive sampling via meta-learning
on learning curves. In: Machine Learning: ECML 2004, 15th European
Conference on Machine Learning. pp 250–261
Leite R, Brazdil P (2005) Predicting relative performance of classifiers
from samples. In: Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twenty-Second
International Conference (ICML 2005). pp 497–503
Leite R, Brazdil P (2007) An iterative process for building learning curves
and predicting relative performance of classifiers. In: Progress in Artificial
Intelligence, 13th Portuguese Conference on Aritficial Intelligence, EPIA
2007. pp 87–98
LeiteR,BrazdilP(2008)Selectingclassifiersusingmetalearningwithsampling
landmarks and data characterization. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Planning
to Learn Workshop (PlanLearn) at ICML/COLT/UAI, pp 35–41
Leite R, Brazdil P (2010) Active testing strategy to predict the best classi-
fication algorithm via sampling and metalearning. In: ECAI 2010 - 19th
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence. pp 309–314
LiL,JamiesonKG,DeSalvoG,etal(2017)Hyperband:Anovelbandit-based
approach to hyperparameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 18:185:1–185:52
Long D, Zhang S, Zhang Y (2020) Performance prediction based on neural
architecture features. Cognitive Computation and Systems 2(2):80–83
Loog M, Duin RP (2012) The dipping phenomenon. In: Joint IAPR Interna-
tional Workshops on Statistical Techniques in Pattern Recognition (SPR)
and Structural and Syntactic Pattern Recognition (SSPR), pp 310–317
Loog M, Viering TJ, Mey A (2019) Minimizers of the empirical risk and risk
monotonicity. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32,
pp 7476–7485
Mao Z, Jung T, Lin C, et al (2016) Predicting EEG sample size required for
classificationcalibration.In:FoundationsofAugmentedCognition:Neuroer-
gonomicsandOperationalNeuroscience-10thInternationalConference,AC
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
62 Learning Curves for Decision Making
2016. pp 57–68
MeekC,ThiessonB,HeckermanD(2002)Thelearning-curvesamplingmethod
applied to model-based clustering. Journal of Machine Learning Research
2:397–418
Mhammedi Z, Husain H (2021) Risk-monotonicity in statistical learning. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, pp 10,732–10,744
Mohr F, van Rijn JN (2021) Towards model selection using learning curve
cross-validation. In: 8th ICML Workshop on Automated Machine Learning
(AutoML)
Mohr F, van Rijn JN (2023) Fast and informative model selection using
learningcurvecross-validation.IEEETransactionsonPatternAnalysisand
Machine Intelligence 45(8):9669–9680
Mohr F, Viering TJ, Loog M, et al (2022) LCDB 1.0: An extensive learning
curvesdatabaseforclassificationtasks.In:MachineLearningandKnowledge
Discovery in Databases - European Conference, ECML PKDD. pp 3–19
Mørch NJS, Hansen LK, Strother SC, et al (1997) Nonlinear versus lin-
ear models in functional neuroimaging: Learning curves and generalization
crossover.In:InformationProcessinginMedicalImaging,15thInternational
Conference, IPMI’97. pp 259–270
MukherjeeS,TamayoP,RogersS,etal(2003)Estimatingdatasetsizerequire-
ments for classifying DNA microarray data. Journal of Computational
Biology 10(2):119–142
Murata N, Yoshizawa S, Amari S (1992) Learning curves, model selection
and complexity of neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 5. pp 607–614
NakkiranP,KaplunG,BansalY,etal(2020)Deepdoubledescent:Wherebig-
germodelsandmoredatahurt.In:8thInternationalConferenceonLearning
Representations, ICLR’20
Nakkiran P, Venkat P, Kakade SM, et al (2021) Optimal regularization
can mitigate double descent. In: 9th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2021
Ng AY, Jordan MI (2001) On discriminative vs. generative classifiers: A
comparison of logistic regression and naive bayes. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 14. pp 841–848
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 63
Ng W, Dash M (2006) An evaluation of progressive sampling for imbal-
anced data sets. In: Workshops Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2006). pp 657–661
Oyedare T, Park JJ (2019) Estimating the required training dataset size for
transmitter classification using deep learning. In: 2019 IEEE International
SymposiumonDynamicSpectrumAccessNetworks,DySPAN2019.pp1–10
PerlichC,ProvostFJ,SimonoffJS(2003)Treeinductionvs.logisticregression:
A learning-curve analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research 4:211–255
Petrak J (2000) Fast subsampling performance estimates for classification
algorithm selection. In: Proceedings of the ECML-00 Workshop on Meta-
Learning: Building Automatic Advice Strategies for Model Selection and
Method Combination, pp 3–14
Pfisterer F, Schneider L, Moosbauer J, et al (2022) YAHPO gym - an efficient
multi-objective multi-fidelity benchmark for hyperparameter optimization.
In:InternationalConferenceonAutomatedMachineLearning,AutoML.pp
3/1–39
ProvostFJ,JensenDD,OatesT(1999)Efficientprogressivesampling.In:Pro-
ceedingsoftheFifthACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. pp 23–32
Richter AN, Khoshgoftaar TM (2019) Approximating learning curves for
imbalanced big data with limited labels. In: 31st IEEE International
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, ICTAI 2019. pp 237–242
vanRijnJN,AbdulrahmanSM,BrazdilP,etal(2015)Fastalgorithmselection
using learning curves. In: Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis XIV. pp
298–309
Ruhkopf T, Mohan A, Deng D, et al (2023) Masif: Meta-learned algo-
rithm selection using implicit fidelity information. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research 2023
SabharwalA,SamulowitzH,TesauroG(2016)Selectingnear-optimallearners
viaincrementaldataallocation.In:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceon
Artificial Intelligence
Sarkar A, Guo J, Siegmund N, et al (2015) Cost-efficient sampling for per-
formance prediction of configurable systems (T). In: 30th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2015.
pp 342–352
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
64 Learning Curves for Decision Making
Settles B (2009) Active learning literature survey. Tech. rep., University of
Wisconsin
Seung HS, Sompolinsky H, Tishby N (1992) Statistical mechanics of learning
from examples. Physical Review A 45(8):6056
Siems J, Zimmer L, Zela A, et al (2020) Nas-bench-301 and the case for sur-
rogate benchmarks for neural architecture search. CoRR abs/2008.09777.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.09777
SinghS(2005)Modelingperformanceofdifferentclassificationmethods:devi-
ationfromthepowerlaw.ProjectReport,DepartmentofComputerScience,
Vanderbilt University, USA
Strang B, van der Putten P, van Rijn JN, et al (2018) Don’t rule out simple
models prematurely: A large scale benchmark comparing linear and non-
linear classifiers in openml. In: Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis XVII.
pp 303–315
Swersky K, Snoek J, Adams RP (2014) Freeze-thaw bayesian optimization.
CoRR abs/1406.3896. https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.3896
Tomanek K (2010) Resource-aware annotation through active learning. PhD
thesis, Dortmund University of Technology
ValletF,CailtonJG,RefregierP(1989)Linearandnonlinearextensionofthe
pseudo-inverse solution for learning boolean functions. EPL (Europhysics
Letters) 9(4):315
Viering TJ, Loog M (2023) The shape of learning curves: A review. IEEE
TransactionsonPatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence45(6):7799–7819
Viering TJ, Mey A, Loog M (2020) Making learners (more) monotone. In:
Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis XVIII. pp 535–547
Waltz M, Fu K (1965) A heuristic approach to reinforcement learning control
systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 10(4):390–398
Wang X, Chen Y, Zhu W (2022) A survey on curriculum learning. IEEE
TransactionsonPatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence44(9):4555–4576
Weiss GM, Provost FJ (2003) Learning when training data are costly: The
effectofclassdistributionontreeinduction.JournalofArtificialIntelligence
Research 19:315–354
Weiss GM, Tian Y (2006) Maximizing classifier utility when training data is
costly. SIGKDD Explorations 8(2):31–38
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Learning Curves for Decision Making 65
Weiss GM, Tian Y (2008) Maximizing classifier utility when there are data
acquisition and modeling costs. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
17(2):253–282
White C, Safari M, Sukthanker R, et al (2023) Neural architecture search:
Insights from 1000 papers. CoRR abs/2301.08727. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2301.08727
Wistuba M, Pedapati T (2019) Inductive transfer for neural architecture
optimization. CoRR abs/1903.03536. https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03536
Zeng X, Luo G (2017) Progressive sampling-based bayesian optimization for
efficient and automatic machine learning model selection. Health Informa-
tion Science and Systems 5(1):2
