future work would be to explore the use of zero-knowledge proofs to ensure that users are
submitting updates with pre-speciﬁed properties. Solutions based on hardware attestation could also be
considered. For instance, a user’s mobile phone might have the ability to attest that the shared model
updates were computed correctly using images produced by the phone’s camera.
Collusion defenses Model update poisoning attacks may drastically increase in effectiveness if the adver-
saries are allowed to collude. This collusion can allow the adversaries to create model update attacks that are
both more effective and more difﬁcult to detect [52]. This paradigm is strongly related to sybil attacks [160],
in which clients are allowed to join and leave the system at will. Since the server is unable to view client
data, detecting sybil attacks may be much more difﬁcult in federated learning. Recent work has shown that
federated learning is vulnerable to both targeted and untargeted sybil attacks [190]. Potential challenges for
federated learning involve defending against collusion or detecting colluding adversaries, without directly
inspecting the data of nodes.
5.1.3 Data Poisoning Attacks
A potentially more restrictive class of attack than model update poisoning is data poisoning. In this paradigm,
the adversary cannot directly corrupt reports to the central node. Instead, the adversary can only manipulate
client data, perhaps by replacing labels or speciﬁc features of the data. As with model update poisoning,
data poisoning can be performed both for targeted attacks [69, 115, 275] and untargeted attacks [319, 44].
This attack model may be more natural when the adversary can only inﬂuence the data collection process
at the edge of the federated learning system, but cannot directly corrupt derived quantities within the learning
system (e.g. model updates).
Data poisoning and Byzantine-robust aggregation Since data poisoning attacks induce model update
poisoning, any defense against Byzantine updates can also be used to defend against data poisoning. For
example Xie et al. [487], Xie [484] and Xie et al. [486] proposed Byzantine-robust aggregators that success-
fully defended against label-ﬂipping data poisoning attacks on convolutional neural networks. As discussed
in Section 5.1.2, one important line of work involves analyzing and improving these approaches in feder-
ated learning. Non-IID data and unreliability of clients all present serious challenges and disrupt common
assumptions in works on Byzantine-robust aggregation. For data poisoning, there is a possibility that the
Byzantine threat model is too strong. By restricting to data poisoning (instead of general model update poi-
soning), it may be possible to design a more tailored and effective Byzantine-robust aggregator. We discuss
67
this in more detail in at the end of Section 5.1.3.
Data sanitization and network pruning Defenses designed speciﬁcally for data poisoning attacks fre-
quently rely on “data sanitization” methods [141], which aim to remove poisoned or otherwise anomalous
data. More recent work has developed improved data sanitization methods using robust statistics [432, 416,
454, 152], which often have the beneﬁt of being provably robust to small numbers of outliers [152]. Such
methods can be applied to both targeted and untargeted attacks, with some degree of empirical success [416].
A related class of defenses used for defending against backdoor attacks are “pruning” defenses. Rather
than removing anomalous data, pruning defenses attempt to remove activation units that are inactive on
clean data [314, 465]. Such methods are motivated by previous studies which showed empirically that poi-
soned data designed to introduce a backdoor often triggers so-called “backdoor neurons” [214]. While such
methods do not require direct access to all client data, they require “clean” holdout data that is representative
of the global dataset.
Neither data sanitization nor network pruning work directly in federated settings, as they both generally
require access to client data, or else data that resembles client data. Thus, it is an open question whether
data sanitization methods and network pruning methods can be used in federated settings without privacy
loss, or whether or not defenses against data poisoning require new federated approaches. Furthermore, Koh
et al. [276] recently showed that many heuristic defenses based on data sanitization remain vulnerable to
adaptive poisoning attacks, suggesting that even a federated approach to data sanitization may not be enough
to defend against data poisoning.
Even detecting the presence of poisoned data (without necessarily correcting for it or identifying the
client with poisoned data) is challenging in federated learning. This difﬁculty becomes ampliﬁed when the
data poisoning is meant to insert a backdoor, as then even metrics such as global training accuracy or per
client training accuracy may not be enough to detect the presence of a backdoor.
Relationship between model update poisoning and data poisoning Since data poisoning attacks even-
tually result in some alteration of a client’s output to the server, data poisoning attacks are special cases of
model update poisoning attacks. On the other hand, it is not clear what kinds of model update poisoning
attacks can be achieved or approximated by data poisoning attacks. Recent work by Bhagoji et al. [67]
suggests that data poisoning may be weaker, especially in settings with limited participation rate (see Table
11). One interesting line of study would be to quantify the gap between these two types of attacks, and relate
this gap to the relative strength of an adversary operating under these attack models. While this question
can be posed independently of federated learning, it is particularly important in federated learning due to
differences in adversary capabilities (see Table 11). For example, the maximum number of clients that can
perform data poisoning attacks may be much higher than the number that can perform model update poison-
ing attacks, especially in cross-device settings. Thus, understanding the relation between these two attack
types, especially as they relate to the number of adversarial clients, would greatly help our understanding of
the threat landscape in federated learning.
This problem can be tackled in a variety of manners. Empirically, one could study the discrepancy
in performance of various attacks. or investigate whether various model update poisoning attacks can be
approximated by data poisoning attacks, and would develop methods for doing so. Theoretically, although
we conjecture that model update poisoning is provably stronger than data poisoning, we are unaware of any
formal statements addressing this. One possible approach would be to use insights and techniques from
work on machine teaching (see [511] for reference) to understand “optimal” data poisoning attacks, as in
[340]. Any formal statement will likely depend on quantities such as the number of corrupted clients and
68
the function class of interest. Intuitively, the relation between model update poisoning and data poisoning
should depend on the overparameterization of the model with respect to the data.
5.1.4 Inference-Time Evasion Attacks
In evasion attacks, an adversary may attempt to circumvent a deployed model by carefully manipulating
samples that are fed into the model. One well-studied form of evasion attacks are so-called “adversarial ex-
amples.” These are perturbed versions of test inputs which seem almost indistinguishable from the original
test input to a human, but fool the trained model [70, 441]. In image and audio domains, adversarial exam-
ples are generally constructed by adding norm-bounded perturbations to test examples, though more recent
works explore other distortions [176, 477, 259]. In the white-box setting, the aforementioned perturbations
can be generated by attempting to maximize the loss function subject to a norm constraint via constrained
optimization methods such as projected gradient ascent [284, 328]. Such attacks can frequently cause nat-
urally trained models to achieve zero accuracy on image classiﬁcation benchmarks such as CIFAR-10 or
ImageNet [98]. In the black-box setting, models have also been shown to be vulnerable to attacks based on
query-access to the model [113, 90] or based on substitute models trained on similar data [441, 366, 452].
While black-box attacks may be more natural to consider in datacenter settings, the model broadcast step in
federated learning means that the model may be accessible to any malicious client. Thus, federated learning
increases the need for defenses against white-box evasion attacks.
Various methods have been proposed to make models more robust to evasion attacks. Here, robustness
is often measured by the model performance on white-box adversarial examples. Unfortunately, many
proposed defenses have been shown to only provide a superﬁcial sense of security [30]. On the other
hand, adversarial training, in which a robust model is trained with adversarial examples, generally provides
some robustness to white-box evasion attacks [328, 483, 412]. Adversarial training is often formulated as
a minimax optimization problem, where the adversarial examples and the model weights are alternatively
updated. We note that there is no canonical formulation of adversarial training, and choices such as the
minimax optimization problem and hyperparameters such as learning rate can signiﬁcantly affect the model
robustness, especially for large-scale dataset like ImageNet. Moreover, adversarial training typically only
improves robustness to the speciﬁc type of adversarial examples incorporated during training, potentially
leaving the trained model vulnerable to other forms of adversarial noise [176, 448, 414].
Adapting adversarial training methods to federated learning brings a host of open questions. For ex-
ample, adversarial training can require many epochs before obtaining signiﬁcant robustness. However, in
federated learning, especially cross-device federated learning, each training sample may only be seen a lim-
ited number of times. More generally, adversarial training was developed primarily for IID data, and it is
unclear how it performs in non-IID settings. For example, setting appropriate bounds on the norm of pertur-
bations to perform adversarial training (a challenging problem even in the IID setting [453]) becomes harder
in federated settings where the training data cannot be inspected ahead of training. Another issue is that
generating adversarial examples is relatively expensive. While some adversarial training frameworks have
attempted to minimize this cost by reusing adversarial examples [412], these approaches would still require
signiﬁcant compute resources from clients. This is potentially problematic in cross-device settings, where
adversarial example generation may exacerbate memory or power constraints. Therefore, new on-device
robust optimization techniques may be required in the federated learning setting.
Relationship between training-time and inference-time attacks The aforementioned discussion of eva-
sion attacks generally assumes the adversary has white-box access (potentially due to systems-level realities
of federated learning) at inference time. This ignores the reality that an adversary could corrupt the training
69
process in order to create or enhance inference-time vulnerabilities of a model, as in [115]. This could be
approached in both untargeted and targeted ways by an adversary; An adversary could use targeted attacks
to create vulnerabilities to speciﬁc types of adversarial examples [115, 214] or use untargeted attacks to
degrade the effectiveness of adversarial training.
One possible defense against combined training- and inference-time adversaries are methods to detect
backdoor attacks [454, 108, 465, 122]. Difﬁculties in applying previous defenses (such as those cited above)
to the federated setting were discussed in more detail in Section 5.1.3. However, purely detecting backdoors
may be insufﬁcient in many federated settings where we want robustness guarantees on the output model
at inference time. More sophisticated solutions could potentially combine training-time defenses (such as
robust aggregation or differential privacy) with adversarial training. Other open work in this area could
involve quantifying how various types of training-time attacks impact the inference-time vulnerability of
a model. Given the existing challenges in defending against purely training-time or purely inference-time
attacks, this line of work is necessarily more speculative and unexplored.
5.1.5 Defensive Capabilities from Privacy Guarantees
Many challenges in federated learning systems can be viewed as ensuring some amount of robustness :
whether maliciously or not, clean data is corrupted or otherwise tampered with. Recent work on data privacy,
notably differential privacy (DP) [167], deﬁnes privacy in terms of robustness. In short, random noise is
added at training or test time in order to reduce the inﬂuence of speciﬁc data points. For a more detailed
explanation on differential privacy, see Section 4.2.2. As a defense technique, differential privacy has several
compelling strengths. First, it provides strong, worst-case protections against a variety of attacks. Second,
there are many known differentially private algorithms, and the defense can be applied to many machine
learning tasks. Finally, differential privacy is known to be closed under composition, where the inputs to
later algorithms are determined after observing the results of earlier algorithms.
We brieﬂy describe the use of differential privacy as a defense against the three kinds of attacks that we
have seen above.
Defending against model update poisoning attacks The service provider can bound the contribution of
any individual client to the overall model by (1) enforcing a norm constraint on the client model update (e.g.
by clipping the client updates), (2) aggregating the clipped updates, (3) and adding Gaussian noise to the
aggregate. This approach prevents over-ﬁtting to any individual update (or a small group of malicious indi-
viduals), and is identical to training with differential privacy (discussed in Section 4.3.2). This approach has
been recently explored by Sun et al. [438], which shows preliminary success in applying differential privacy
as a defense against targeted attacks. However, the scope of experiments and targeted attacks analyzed by
Sun et al. [438] should be extended to include more general adversarial attacks. In particular, Wang et al.
[466], show that the use of edge case backdoors, generated from data samples with low probability in the
underlying distribution, is able to bypass differential privacy defenses. They further demonstrate that the
existence of adversarial examples implies the existence of edge-case backdoors, indicating that defenses for
the two threats may need to be developed in tandem. Therefore, more work remains to verify whether or
not DP can indeed be an effective defense. More importantly, it is still unclear how hyperparameters for DP
(such as the size of `2norm bounds and noise variance) can be chosen as a function of the model size and
architecture, as well as the fraction of malicious devices.
70
Defending against data poisoning attacks Data poisoning can be thought of as a failure of a learning
algorithm to be robust: a few attacked training examples may strongly affect the learned model. Thus, one
natural way to defend against these attacks is to make the learning algorithm differentially private, improving
robustness. Recent work has explored differential privacy as a defense against data poisoning [326], and in
particular in the federated learning context [199]. Intuitively, an adversary who is only able to modify a few
training examples cannot cause a large change in the distribution over learned models.
While differential privacy is a ﬂexible defense against data poisoning, it also has some drawbacks. The
main weakness is that noise must be injected into the learning procedure. While this is not necessarily
a problem—common learning algorithms like stochastic gradient descent already inject noise—the added
noise can hurt the performance of the learned model. Furthermore, the adversary can only control a small
number of devices.10Accordingly, differential privacy can be viewed as both a strong and a weak defense
against data poisoning—it is strong in that it is extremely general and provides worst case protection no
matter the goals of the adversary, and it is weak in that the adversary must be restricted and noise must be
added to the federated learning process.
Defending against inference-time evasion attacks Differential privacy has also been studied as a defense
against inference-time attacks, where the adversary may modify test examples to manipulate the learned
model. A straightforward approach is to make the predictor itself differentially private; however, this has
the drawback that prediction becomes randomized, a usually undesirable feature that can also hurt inter-
pretability. More sophisticated approaches [296] add noise and then release the prediction with the highest
probability. We believe that there are other opportunities for further exploration in this direction.
5.2 Non-Malicious Failure Modes
Compared to datacenter training, federated learning is particularly susceptible to non-malicious failures from
unreliable clients outside the control of the service provider. Just as with adversarial attacks, systems factors
and data constraints also exacerbate non-malicious failures present in datacenter settings. We also note
that techniques (described in the following sections) which are designed to address worst-case adversarial
robustness are also able to effectively address non-malicious failures. While non-malicious failures are
generally less damaging than malicious attacks, they are potentially more common, and share common
roots and complications with the malicious attacks. We therefore expect progress in understanding and
guarding against non-malicious failures to also inform defenses against malicious attacks.
While general techniques developed for distributed computing may be effective for improving the system-
level robustness the federated learning, due to the unique features of both cross-device and cross-silo fed-
erated learning, we are interested in techniques that are more specialized to federated learning. Below we
discuss three possible non-malicious failure modes in the context of federated learning: client reporting
failures, data pipeline failures, and noisy model updates. We also discuss potential approaches to making
federated learning more robust to such failures.
Client reporting failures Recall that in federated learning, each training round involves broadcasting a
model to the clients, local client computation, and client reports to the central aggregator. For any partic-
ipating client, systems factors may cause failures at any of these steps. Such failures are especially likely
in cross-device federated learning, where network bandwidth becomes more of a constraint, and the client
10Technically, robustness to poisoning multiple examples is derived from the group privacy property of differential privacy; this
protection degrades exponentially as the number of attacked points increases.
71
devices are more likely to be edge devices with limited compute power. Even if there is no explicit failure,
there may be straggler clients, which take much longer to report their output than other nodes in the same
round. If the stragglers take long enough to report, they may be omitted from a communication round for
efﬁciency’s sake, effectively reducing the number of participating clients. In “vanilla” federated learning,
this requires no real algorithmic changes, as federated averaging can be applied to whatever clients report
model updates.
Unfortunately, unresponsive clients become more challenging to contend with when using secure ag-
gregation (SecAgg) [80, 58], especially if the clients drop out during the SecAgg protocol. While SecAgg
is designed to be robust to signiﬁcant numbers of dropouts [81], there is still the potential for failure. The
likelihood of failure could be reduced in various complementary ways. One simple method would be to
select more devices than required within each round. This helps ensure that stragglers and failed devices
have minimal effect on the overall convergence [81]. However, in unreliable network settings, this may not
be enough. A more sophisticated way to reduce the failure probability would be to improve the efﬁciency
of SecAgg. This reduces the window of time during which client dropouts would adversely affect SecAgg.
Another possibility would be to develop an asynchronous version of SecAgg that does not require clients to
participate during a ﬁxed window of time, possibly by adapting techniques from general asynchronous se-
cure multi-party distributed computation protocols [430]. More speculatively, it may be possible to perform
versions of SecAgg that aggregate over multiple computation rounds. This would allow straggler nodes to
be included in subsequent rounds, rather than dropping out of the current round altogether.
Data pipeline failures While data pipelines in federated learning only exist within each client, there are
still many potential issues said pipelines can face. In particular, any federated learning system still must
deﬁne how raw user data is accessed and preprocessed in to training data. Bugs or unintended actions in this
pipeline can drastically alter the federated learning process. While data pipeline bugs can often be discovered
via standard data analysis tools in the data center setting, the data restrictions in federated learning makes
detection signiﬁcantly more challenging. For example, feature-level preprocessing issues (such as inverting
pixels, concatenating words, etc.) can not be directly detected by the server [31]. One possible solution is to
train generative models using federated methods with differential privacy, and then using these to synthesize
new data samples that can be used to debug the underlying data pipelines [31]. Developing general-purpose
debugging methods for machine learning that do not directly inspect raw data remains a challenge.
Noisy model updates In Section 5.1 above, we discussed the potential for an adversary to send malicious
model updates to the server from some number of clients. Even if no adversary is present, the model updates
sent to the server may become distorted due to network and architectural factors. This is especially likely
in cross-client settings, where separate entities control the server, clients, and network. Similar distortions
can occur due to the client data. Even if the data on a client is not intentionally malicious, it may have noisy
features [350] (eg. in vision applications, a client may have a low-resolution camera whose output is scaled
to a higher resolution) or noisy labels [356] (eg. if the user indicates that a recommendation by an app is
not relevant accidentally). While clients in cross-silo federated learning systems (see Table 1) may perform
data cleaning to remove such corruptions, such processing is unlikely to occur in cross-device settings due
to data privacy restrictions. In the end, these aforementioned corruptions may harm the convergence of the
federated learning process, whether they are due to network factors or noisy data.
Since these corruptions can be viewed as mild forms of model update and data poisoning attacks, one
mitigation strategy would be to use defenses for adversarial model update and data poisoning attacks. Given
the current lack of demonstrably robust training methods in the federated setting, this may not be a prac-
tical option. Moreover, even if such techniques existed, they may be too computation-intensive for many
72
federated learning applications. Thus, open work here involves developing training methods that are robust
to small to moderate levels of noise. Another possibility is that standard federated training methods (such
as federated averaging [337]) are inherently robust to small amounts of noise. Investigating the robustness
of various federated training methods to varying levels amount of noise would shed light on how to ensure
robustness of federated learning systems to non-malicious failure modes.
5.3 Exploring the Tension between Privacy and Robustness
One primary technique used to enforce privacy is secure aggregation (SecAgg) (see 4.2.1). In short, SecAgg
is a tool used to ensure that the server only sees an aggregate of the client updates, not any individual
client updates. While useful for ensuring privacy, SecAgg generally makes defenses against adversarial
attacks more difﬁcult to implement, as the central server only sees the aggregate of the client updates.
Therefore, it is of fundamental interest to investigate how to defend against adversarial attacks when secure
aggregation is used. Existing approaches based on range proofs (e.g. Bulletproofs [92]) can guarantee that
the DP-based clipping defense described above is compatible with SecAgg, but developing computation-
and communication-efﬁcient range proofs is still an active research direction.
SecAgg also introduces challenges for other defense methods. For example, many existing Byzantine-
robust aggregation methods utilize non-linear operations on the server Xie et al. [486], and it is not yet known
if these methods are efﬁciently compatible with secure aggregation which was originally designed for linear
aggregation. Recent work has found ways to approximate the geometric median under SecAgg [379] by
using a handful of SecAgg calls in a more general aggregation loop. However, it is not clear in general
which aggregators can be computed under the use of SecAgg.
5.4 Executive Summary
• Third-party participants in the training process introduces new capabilities and attack vectors for
adversaries, categorized in Table 11.
• Federated learning introduces a new kind of poisoning attacks, model update poisoning (Section
5.1.2), while also being susceptible to traditional data poisoning in (Section 5.1.3).
• Training participants can inﬂuence the optimization process possibly exacerbating inference-time
(Section evasion attacks ) 5.1.4, and communication and computation constraints may render pre-
viously proposed defenses impractical.
• Non-malicious failure modes (Section 5.2) are can be especially different to deal with, as access to
raw data is not available in the federated setting, though through some lens they may be related to
poisoning attacks.
• Tension may exist when trying to simultaneously improve robustness and privacy in machine learning
(Section 5.3).
Areas identiﬁed for further exploration include:
• Quantify the relationship between data poisoning and model update poisoning attacks. Are there
scenarios where they are not equivalent? [5.1.3]
73
• Quantify how training time attacks impact inference-time vulnerabilities. Improving inference-time
robustness guarantees requires going beyond detecting backdoor attacks. [5.1.4]
• Adversarial training has been used as a defense in the centralized setting, but can be impractical in the
edge-compute limited cross-device federated setting. [5.1.5]
• Federated learning requires new methods and tools to support the developer, as access to raw data is
restricted debugging ML pipelines is especially difﬁcult. [5.2]
• Tensions exists between robustness and fairness, as machine learning models can tend to discard
updates far from the median as detrimental. However the federated setting can give rise to a long tail
of users that may be mistaken for noisy model updates [5.2].
• Cryptography-based aggregation methods and robustness techniques present integration challenges:
protecting participant identity can be at odds with detecting adversarial participants. Proposed tech-
niques remain beyond the scope of practicality, requiring the need of new communication and com-
putation efﬁcient algorithms. [5.3]
74
6 Ensuring Fairness and Addressing Sources of Bias
Machine learning models can often exhibit surprising and unintended behaviours. When such behaviours
lead to patterns of undesirable effects on users, we might categorize the model as “unfair” according to
some criteria. For example, if people with similar characteristics receive quite different outcomes, then this
violates the criterion of individual fairness [169]. If certain sensitive groups (races, genders, etc.) receive
different patterns of outcomes—such as different false negative rates—this can violate various criteria of de-
mographic fairness , see for instance [51, 349] for surveys. The criterion of counterfactual fairness requires
that a user receive the same treatment as they would have if they had been a member of a different group
(race, gender, etc), after taking all causally relevant pathways into account [287].
Federated learning raises several opportunities for fairness research, some of which extend prior research
directions in the non-federated setting, and others that are unique to federated learning. This section raises
open problems in both categories.
6.1 Bias in Training Data
One driver of unfairness in machine-learned models is bias in the training data, including cognitive, sam-
pling, reporting, and conﬁrmation bias. One common antipattern is that minority or marginalized social
groups are under-represented in the training data, and thus the learner weights these groups less during
training [258], leading to inferior quality predictions for members of these groups (e.g. [93]).
Just as the data access processes used in federated learning may introduce dataset shift and non-independence
(Section 3.1), there is also a risk of introducing biases. For example:
• If devices are selected for updates when plugged-in or fully charged, then model updates and evalua-
tions computed at different times of day may be correlated with factors such as day-shift vs night-shift
work schedules.
• If devices are selected for updates from among the pool of eligible devices at a given time, then
devices that are connected at times when few other devices are connected (e.g. night-shift or unusual
time zone) may be over-represented in the aggregated output.
• If selected devices are more likely to have their output kept when the output is computed faster,
then: a) output from devices with faster processors may be over-represented, with these devices likely
newer devices and thus correlated with socioeconomic status; and b) devices with less data may be
over-represented, with these devices possibly representing users who use the product less frequently.
• If data nodes have different amounts of data, then federated learning may weigh higher the contribu-
tions of populations which are heavy users of the product or feature generating the data.
• If the update frequency depends on latency, then certain geographic regions and populations with
slower devices or networks may be under-represented.
• If populations of potential users do not own devices for socio-economic reasons, they may be under-
represented in the training dataset, and subsequently also under- (or un-)represented in model training
and evaluation.
• Unweighted aggregation of the model loss across selected devices during federated training may dis-
advantage model performance on certain devices [302].
75
It has been observed that biases in the data-generating process can also drive unfairness in the result-
ing models learned from this data (see e.g. [170, 394]). For example, suppose training data is based on
user interactions with a product which has failed to incorporate inclusive design principles. Then, the user
interactions with the product might not express user intents (cf. [403], for example) but rather might ex-
press coping strategies around uninclusive product designs (and hence might require a fundamental ﬁx to
the product interaction model). Learning from such interactions might then ignore or perpetuate poor expe-
riences for some groups of product users in ways which can be difﬁcult to detect while maintaining privacy
in a federated setting. This risk is shared by all machine learning scenarios where training data is derived
from user interaction, but is of particular note in the federated setting when data is collected from apps on
individual devices.
Investigating the degree to which biases in the data-generated process can be identiﬁed or mitigated
is a crucial problem for both federated learning research and ML research more broadly. Similarly, while
limited prior research has demonstrated methods to identify and correct bias in already collected data in the
federated setting (e.g. via adversarial methods in [255]), further research in this area is needed. Finally,
methods for applying post-hoc fairness corrections to models learned from potentially biased training data
are also a valuable direction for future work.
6.2 Fairness Without Access to Sensitive Attributes
Having explicit access to demographic information (race, gender, etc) is critical to many existing fairness
criteria, including those discussed in Section 6.1. However, the contexts in which federated learning are
often deployed also give rise to considerations of fairness when individual sensitive attributes are notavail-
able. For example, this can occur when developing personalized language models or developing fair medical
image classiﬁers without knowing any additional demographic information about individuals. Even more
fundamentally, the assumed one-to-one relationship between individuals and devices often breaks down,
especially in non-Western contexts [403]. Both measuring and correcting unfairness in contexts where there
is no data regarding sensitive group membership is a key area for federated learning researchers to address.
Limited existing research has examined fairness without access to sensitive attributes. For example,
this has been addressed using distributionally-robust optimization (DRO) which optimizes for the worst-
case outcome across all individuals during training [225], and via multicalibration, which calibrates for
fairness across subsets of the training data [232]. Even these existing approaches have not been applied in
the federated setting, raising opportunities for future empirical work. The challenge of how to make these
approaches work for large-scale, high-dimensional data typical to federated settings is also an open problem,
as DRO and multicalibration both pose challenges of scaling with large nandp. Finally, the development
of additional theoretical approaches to deﬁning fairness without respect to “sensitive attributes” is a critical
area for further research.
Other ways to approach this include reframing the existing notions of fairness, which are primarily
concerned with equalizing the probability of an outcome (one of which is considered “positive” and another
“negative” for the affected individual). Instead, fairness without access to sensitive attributes might be
reframed as equal access to effective models . Under this interpretation of fairness, the goal is to maximize
model utility across all individuals, regardless of their (unknown) demographic identities, and regardless of
the “goodness“ of an individual outcome. Again, this matches the contexts in which federated learning is
most commonly used, such as language modeling or medical image classiﬁcation, where there is no clear
notion of an outcome which is “good” for a user, and instead the aim is simply to make correct predictions
for users, regardless of the outcome.
76
Existing federated learning research suggests possible ways to meet such an interpretation of fairness,
e.g. via personalization [250, 472]. A similar conception of fairness, as “a more fair distribution of the
model performance across devices”, is employed in [302].
The application of attribute-independent methods explicitly to ensure equitable model performance is an
open opportunity for future federated learning research, and is particularly important as federated learning
reaches maturity and sees increasing deployment with real populations of users without knowledge of their
sensitive identities.
6.3 Fairness, Privacy, and Robustness
Fairness and data privacy seem to be complementary ethical concepts: in many of the real-world contexts
where privacy protection is desired, fairness is also desired. Often this is due to the sensitivity of the
underlying data. Because federated learning is most likely to be deployed in contexts of sensitive data where
both privacy and fairness are desirable, it is important that FL research examines how FL might be able to
address existing concerns about fairness in machine learning, and whether FL raises new fairness-related
issues.
In some ways, however, the ideal of fairness seems to be in tension with the notions of privacy for
which FL seeks to provide guarantees: differentially-private learning typically seeks to obscure individually-
identifying characteristics, while fairness often requires knowing individuals’ membership in sensitive groups
in order to measure or ensure fair predictions are being made. While the trade-off between differential pri-
vacy and fairness has been investigated in the non-federated setting [246, 145], there has been little work on
how (or whether) FL may be able to uniquely address concerns about fairness.
Recent evidence suggesting that differentially-private learning can have disparate impact on sensitive
subgroups [43, 145, 246, 283] provides further motivation to investigate whether FL may be able to ad-
dress such concerns. A potential solution to relax the tension between privacy (which aims to protect the
model from being too dependent on individuals) and fairness (which encourages the model to perform well
on under-represented classes) may be the application of techniques such as personalization (discussed in
Section 3.3) and “hybrid differential privacy,” where some users donate data with lesser privacy guarantees
[40].
Furthermore, current differentially-private optimization schemes are applied without respect to sensi-
tive attributes – from this perspective, it might be expected that empirical studies have shown evidence that
differentially-private optimization impacts minority subgroups the most [43]. Modiﬁcations to differentially-
private optimization algorithms which explicitly seek to preserve performance on minority subgroups, e.g.
by adapting the noise and clipping mechanisms to account for the representation of groups within the data,
would also likely do a great deal to limit potential disparate impacts of differentially-private modeling on
minority subgroups in federated models trained with differential privacy. However, implementing such
adaptive differentially-private mechanisms in a way that provides some form of privacy guarantee presents
both algorithmic and theoretical challenges which need to be addressed by future work.
Further research is also needed to determine the extent to which the issues above arise in the federated
setting. Furthermore, as noted in Section 6.2, the challenge of evaluating the impact of differential privacy
on model fairness becomes particularly difﬁcult when sensitive attributes are not available, as it is unclear
how to identify subgroups for which a model is behaving badly and to quantify the “price” of differential
privacy – investigating and addressing these challenges is an open problem for future work.
More broadly, one could more generally examine the relation between privacy, fairness, and robustness
(see Section 5). Many previous works on machine learning, including federated learning, typically focus on
77
isolated aspects of robustness (either against poisoning, or against evasion), privacy, or fairness. An impor-
tant open challenge is to develop a joint understanding of federated learning systems that are robust, private,
and fair. Such an integrated approach can provide opportunities to beneﬁt from disparate but complemen-
tary mechanisms. Differential privacy mechanisms can be used to both mitigate data inference attacks, and
provide a foundation for robustness against data poisoning. On the other hand, such an integrated approach
also reveals new vulnerabilities. For example, recent work has revealed a trade-off between privacy and
robustness against adversarial examples [429].
Finally, privacy and fairness naturally meet in the context of learning data representations that are in-
dependent of some sensitive attributes while preserving utility for a task of interest. Indeed, this objective
can be motivated both in terms of privacy: to transform data so as to hide private attributes, and fairness: as
a way to make models trained on such representations fair with respect to the attributes. In the centralized
setting, one way to learn such representations is through adversarial training techniques, which have been
applied to image and speech data [255, 186, 327, 65, 431]. In the federated learning scenario, clients could
apply the transformation locally to their data in order to enforce or improve privacy and/or fairness guar-
antees for the FL process. However, learning this transformation in a federated fashion (potentially under
privacy and/or fairness constraints) is itself an open question.
6.4 Leveraging Federation to Improve Model Diversity
Federated learning presents the opportunity to integrate, through distributed training, datasets which may
have previously been impractical or even illegal to combine in a single location. For example, the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) constrain the sharing of medical patient data and student educational data, respectively, in the
United States. To date, these restrictions have led to modeling occurring in institutional silos: for example,
using electronic health records or clinical images from individual medical institutions instead of pooling
data and models across institutions [91, 104]. In contexts where membership in institutional datasets is
correlated with individuals’ speciﬁc sensitive attributes, or their behavior and outcomes more broadly, this
can lead to poor representation for users in groups underrepresented at those institutions. Importantly, this
lack of representation and diversity in the training data has been shown to lead to poor performance, e.g. in
genetic disease models [333] and image classiﬁcation models [93].
Federated learning presents an opportunity to leverage uniquely diverse datasets by providing efﬁcient
decentralized training protocols along with privacy and non-identiﬁability guarantees for the resulting mod-
els. This means that federated learning enables training on multi-instutitional datasets in many domains
where this was previously not possible. This provides a practical opportunity to leverage larger, more di-
verse datasets and explore the generalizability of models which were previously limited to small populations.
More importantly, it provides an opportunity to improve the fairness of these models by combining data
across boundaries which are likely to have been correlated with sensitive attributes. For instance, attendance
at speciﬁc health or educational institutions may be correlated with individuals’ ethnicity or socioeconomic
status. As noted in Section 6.1 above, underrepresentation in training data is a proven driver of model
unfairness.
Future federated learning research should investigate the degree to which improving diversity in a feder-
ated training setting also improves the fairness of the resulting model, and the degree to which the differential
privacy mechanisms required in such settings may limit fairness and performance gains from increased di-
versity. This includes a need for both empirical research which applies federated learning and quantiﬁes
the interplay between diversity, fairness, privacy, and performance; along with theoretical research which
provides a foundation for concepts such as diversity in the context of machine learning fairness.
78
6.5 Federated Fairness: New Opportunities and Challenges
It is important to note that federated learning provides unique opportunities and challenges for fairness
researchers. For example, by allowing for datasets which are distributed both by observation, but even
by features, federated learning can enable modeling and research using partitioned data which may be too
sensitive to share directly [215, 224]. Increased availability of datasets which can be used in a federated
manner can help to improve the diversity of training data available for machine learning models, which can
advance fair modeling theory and practice.
Researchers and practitioners also need to address the unique fairness-related challenges created by fed-
erated learning. For example, federated learning can introduce new sources of bias through the decision
of which clients to sample based on considerations such as connection type/quality, device type, location,
activity patterns, and local dataset size [81]. Future work could investigate the degree to which these vari-
ous sampling constraints affect the fairness of the resulting model, and how such impacts can be mitigated
within the federated framework, e.g. [302, 289, 158]. Frameworks such as agnostic federated learning
[352] provide approaches to control for bias in the training objective. Work to improve the fairness of exist-
ing federated training algorithms will be particularly important as advances begin to approach the technical
limits of other components of FL systems, such as model compression, which initially helped to broaden
the diversity of candidate clients during federated training processes. There is no unique fairness criterion
generally adopted in the study of fairness, and multiple criteria have been proven to be mutually incompat-
ible. One way to deal with this question is the online fairness framework and algorithms of Awasthi et al.
[41]. Adapting such solutions to the federated learning setting and further improving upon them will be
challenging research questions in ML fairness theory and algorithms.
In the classical centralized machine learning setting, a substantial amount of advancement has been made
in the past decade to train fair classiﬁers, such as constrained optimization, post-shifting approaches, and
distributionally-robust optimization [223, 503, 225]. It is an open question whether such approaches, which
have demonstrated utility for improving fairness in centralized training, could be used under the setting of
federated learning (and if so, under what additional assumptions) in which data are located in a decentralized
fashion and practitioners may not obtain an unbiased sample of the data that match the distribution of the
population.
6.6 Executive Summary
In addition to inheriting the already signiﬁcant challenges related to bias, fairness, and privacy in centralized
machine learning, federated learning also brings a new set of distinct challenges and opportunities in these
areas. The importance of these considerations will likely continue to grow as the real-world deployment of
FL expands to more users, domains, and applications.
• Bias in training data (Section 6.1) is a key consideration related to bias and fairness in FL models,
particularly due to the additional sampling steps germane to federation (e.g., client sampling) and the
transfer of some model computation to client devices.
• The lack of data regarding sensitive attributes in many FL deployments can pose challenges for mea-
suring and ensuring fairness, and also suggests potential reframing of fairness problems in ways that
do not require such data (Section 6.2).
• Since FL is often deployed in contexts which are both privacy- and fairness-sensitive, this can magnify
tensions between privacy and fairness objectives in practice. Further work is needed to address the
79
potential tension between methods which achieve privacy, fairness, and robustness in both federated
and centralized learning (Section 6.3).
• Federated learning presents unique opportunities to improve the diversity of stakeholders and data
incorporated into learning, which could improve both the overall quality of downstream models, as
well as their fairness due to more representative datasets (Section 6.4).
• Federated learning presents fairness-related challenges not present in the centralized training regime,
but also affords new solutions (Section 6.5).
80
7 Addressing System Challenges
As we will see in this section, the challenges in building systems for federated learning can be split fairly
cleanly into the two separate settings of cross-device and cross-silo federated learning (see Sections 1.1
and 2.2). We start with a brief discussion of the difﬁculties inherent to any large scale deployment of
software on end-user devices (although exacerbated by the complexity of a federated learning stack); we
then focus on key challenges speciﬁc to the cross-device learning—bias, tuning, and efﬁcient device-side
execution of ML workﬂows—before concluding with a brief treatment of the cross-silo setting.
7.1 Platform Development and Deployment Challenges
Running computations on end-user devices is considerably different from the data center setting:
• Due to the heterogeneity of the ﬂeet (devices may differ in hardware, software, connectivity, perfor-
mance and persisted state) the space of potential problems and edge cases is vast and cannot typically
be covered in sufﬁcient detail with automated testing.
• Monitoring and debugging are harder because telemetry is limited, delayed, and there is no physical
access to devices for interactive troubleshooting.
• Running computations should not affect device performance or stability, i.e. should be invisible to
users.
Code Deployment Installing, updating and running software on end user devices may involve not only
extensive manual and automated testing, but a gradual and reversible rollout (for example, through guard-
ing new functionality with server-controlled feature ﬂags) while monitoring key performance metrics in
a/b experiments such as crash rates, memory use, and application-dependent indicators such as latencies
and engagement metrics. Such rollouts can take weeks or months depending on the percolation rate of
updates (particularly challenging for devices with spotty connectivity) and the complexity of the upgrade
(e.g. protocol changes). Hence, the install base at any given time will involve various releases. While
this problem is not speciﬁc to federated learning, it has greater impact here due to the inherent collabo-
rative nature of federated computations: devices constantly communicate with servers and indirectly with
other devices to exchange models and parameter updates. Thus, compatibility concerns abound and must be
addressed through stable exchange formats or, where not possible, detected upfront with extensive testing
infrastructure. We will revisit this problem in Section 7.4.
Monitoring and Debugging Another signiﬁcant complication is the limited ability to monitor devices
and interactively debug problems. While telemetry from end user devices is necessary to detect problems,
privacy concerns severely restrict what can be logged, who can access such logs, and how long they are
retained. Once a regression is detected, drilling down into the root cause can be very cumbersome due to
the lack of detailed context, the vast problem space (a cross product of software versions, hardware, models,
and device state), and very limited ability for interactive debugging short of successfully reproducing the
problem in a controlled environment.
These challenges are exacerbated in the federated learning setting where a) raw input data on devices
cannot be accessed, and b) contributions from individual devices are by design anonymous, ephemeral, and
exposed only in aggregate. These properties preserve privacy, but also may make it hard or impossible to
81
investigate problems with traditional approaches —by looking for correlations with hardware or software
version, or testing hypotheses that require access to raw data. Reproducing a problem in a controlled set-
ting is often difﬁcult due to the gap between such an environment and reality: hundreds of heterogeneous
embedded stateful devices with non-iid data.
Interestingly, federated technologies themselves can help to mitigate this problem—for instance, the use
of federated analytics [382] to collect logs in a privacy preserving manner, or training generative models of
the system behavior or raw data for sampling during debugging (see sections 3.4.3, 5.2, and [31]). Keeping a
federated learning system up and running thus requires investing into upfront detection of problems through
a) extensive automated, continuous test coverage of all software layers through both unit and integration
tests; b) feature ﬂags and a/b rollouts; and c) continuous monitoring of performance indicators for regres-
sions. That poses a signiﬁcant investment that may come at too high a cost for smaller entities who would
beneﬁt greatly from shared and tested infrastructure for federated learning.
7.2 System Induced Bias
Deployment, monitoring and debugging may not concern users of a federated learning platform, e.g. model
authors or data analysts. For them, the key differences between data center and cross-device settings fall
largely into the following two categories:
1.Availability of devices for computations is not a given, but varies over time and across devices. Con-
nections are initiated by devices and subject to interruptions due to changes in device state, operating
system quotas, and network connectivity. Hence, in iterative processes like federated learning, the
loop body is run on a small subset of all devices only, and the system must tolerate a certain failure
rate among those devices.
2.Capabilities of devices (network bandwidth and latency, compute performance, memory) vary, and
are typically much lower than those of compute nodes in the data center, though the number of nodes
is typically higher. The amount and type of data across devices may lead to variations in execution
proﬁle, e.g. more and larger examples lead to increased resource use and processing time.
In the following sections we discuss how these variations might introduce bias, referring to it as system
induced bias to differentiate it from platform-independent bias in the raw data (such as ownership or usage
patterns differing across demographics)—for the latter, see Section 6.1.
7.2.1 Device Availability Proﬁles
At the core of cross-device federated learning is the principle that devices only connect to the server and run
computations when various constraints are met:
•Hard constraints , which might include requiring that the device is turned on, has network connec-
tivity to the server, and is allowed to run a computation by the operating system.
•Soft constraints , which might include the conditions on device state chosen to ensure that federated
learning does not incur charges or affect usability. For the common case of mobile phones [81, 26],
requirements may include idleness, charging and/or above a certain battery level, being connected to
an unmetered network, and that no other federated learning tasks are running at the same time.
82
Taken together, these constraints induce an unknown, time-varying and device-speciﬁc function Ai(t)
for a device i, and a ﬂeet-wide availability proﬁle A(t) =P
iAi(t). Round completion rates and server
trafﬁc patterns [81, 491] suggest that availability proﬁles for mobile phones are clustered into periodic
functions with a period of 1 day, varying across devices in phase, shape and amplitude through factors
such as demographics, geography etc. Availability for other end user devices such as laptops, tablets, or
stationary devices such as smart speakers, displays and cameras, will differ, but the challenges discussed in
the following sections apply there as well, albeit to a possibly lesser extent.
7.2.2 Examples of System Induced Bias
Sources of bias will depend on the speciﬁc way in which devices are selected to participate in training,
and how the system inﬂuences which devices end up contributing to the ﬁnal aggregated model update.
Thus, it is useful to discuss these issues in light of a simpliﬁed but representative system design. In an
iterative federated learning algorithm, such as Federated Averaging (Section 1.1.2, [337]), rounds are run
consecutively on sets of at least Mdevices. To accommodate a fraction dof devices not contributing due to
changes in device conditions, time-outs, or slowness (server-side aborts to avoid slow-downs by stragglers),
an over-allocation scheme is used where
1. Rounds are started when at least M0=M
1 ddevices are available.
2. Rounds are closed as
(a)Aborted when more than M0 Mdevices have disconnected, or
(b)Successful when at least Mdevices have reported. One possible design choice is to stop after
exactlyMdevices; another possibility would be to keep waiting for stragglers (possibly up to
some maximum time).
This sequence, when combined with variable availability proﬁles, may introduce various forms of bias:
1. Selection Bias - whether a device is included in a round at time t depends on both
(a) Its availability proﬁle Ai(t)
(b) The number of simultaneously connected devices: <M0and a round cannot be started; M0
and the probability of a single device being included becomes very small. In effect, devices
active only at either ﬂeet-wide availability peaks or troughs may be under-represented.
2. Survival Bias
(a) Since a server might choose to close a round at any point after the ﬁrst Mdevices have reported,
contributions are biased towards devices with better network connections, faster processors,
lower CPU load, and less data to process.
(b) Devices drop out of rounds when they are interrupted by the operating system, which may hap-
pen due to changes in device conditions as described by Ai(t), or due to e.g. excessive memory
use.
As can be seen, the probability of a device contributing to a round of federated learning is a complex
function of both internal (e.g. device speciﬁc) and external (ﬂeet dynamic) factors. When this probability
is correlated with statistics of the data distribution, aggregate results may be biased. For instance, language
83
models may over-represent demographics that have high quality internet connections or high end devices;
and ranking models may not incorporate enough contributions from high engagement users who produce a
lot of training data and hence longer training times.
Thus, designing systems that explicitly take such factors into account and integrate algorithms designed
to both quantify and mitigate these effects are a fundamentally important research direction.
7.2.3 Open Challenges in Quantifying and Mitigating System Induced Bias
While the potential for bias in federated learning has been addressed in the literature (Section 6, [81, 302,
171]), a systematic study that qualiﬁes and quantiﬁes bias in realistic settings and its sources is a direction for
future research. Conducting the necessary work may be hampered by both access to the necessary resources,
and the difﬁculty in quantifying bias in a ﬁnal statistical estimate due to the inherent lack of ground truth
value.
We want to encourage further research to study how bias can be quantiﬁed and subsequently mitigated.
A useful proxy metric for bias is to study the expected rate of contribution of a device to federated learning.
In an unbiased system, this rate would be identical for every device; if it is not, the non-uniformity may
provide a measure of bias. Studying the root causes for this non-uniformity may then provide important
hints for how to mitigate bias, for example:
• When there is a strong correlation between devices ﬁnishing a round, and the number of examples
they process or model size, possible ﬁxes may include early stopping, or decreasing the model size.
• If the expected rate of contribution depends on factors outside our control, such as device model,
network connectivity, location etc., one can view these factors as deﬁning strata and applying post-
stratiﬁcation [312], that is, correcting for bias by scaling up or down contributions from devices
depending on their stratum. It may also be possible to apply stratiﬁed sampling - e.g. change schedul-
ing, or server selection policies, to affect the probability of including devices in a round as a function
of their stratum.
• A very general, root-cause-agnostic mitigation could base the weight of a contribution solely on a
device’s past contribution proﬁle (e.g. the number of rounds started or completed thus far). As
a special case, consider sampling without replacement which could be implemented at the system
level (stop connecting after one successful contribution) or at the model level (weight all but the ﬁrst
contribution with 0). This approach might not be sufﬁcient when a population is large enough for most
devices to contribute only infrequently (mostly one or zero times); in such cases, clustering devices
based on some similarity metric and using cluster membership as stratum could help.
• Alternatives to the synchronous, round based execution described in the previous section may also
help to mitigate bias. In particular, certain types of analytics may beneﬁt from softening or elim-
inating the competition between devices for inclusion, by running rounds for long times with very
large numbers of participants and without applying time-outs to stragglers. Such a method may not
be applicable to algorithms where the iterative aspect (running many individual, chained rounds) is
important.
The biggest obstacle to enabling such research is access to a representative ﬂeet of end user devices, or a
detailed description (e.g. in the form of a statistical model of a realistic distribution over Ai(t)functions) of
a ﬂeet that can be used in simulations. Here, maintainers of FL production stacks are uniquely positioned to
84
provide such statistics or models to academic partners in a privacy preserving fashion; a further promising
direction is the recent introduction of the Flower framework [66] for federated learning research.
7.3 System Parameter Tuning
Practical federated learning is a form of multi-objective optimization: while the ﬁrst order goal is maximiz-
ing model quality metrics such as loss or accuracy, other important considerations are
• Convergence speed
• Throughput (e.g. number of rounds, amount of data, or number of devices)
• Model fairness, privacy and robustness (see section 6.3)
• Resource use on server and clients
These goals may be in tension. For instance, maximizing round throughput may introduce bias or
hurt accuracy by preferring performant devices with little or no data. Maximizing for low training loss by
increasing model complexity will put devices with less memory, many or large examples, or slow CPUs at a
disadvantage. Bias or fairness induced in such a way during training may be hard to detect in the evaluation
phase since it typically uses the same platform and hence is subject to similar biases.
Various controls affect the above listed indicators. Some are familiar from the datacenter setting, in
particular model speciﬁc settings and learning algorithm hyperparameters. Others are speciﬁc to federated
learning:
•Clients per round : The minimum number of devices required to complete a round, M, and the
number of devices required to start a round, M0.
•Server-side scheduling : In all but the simplest cases, a federated learning system will operate on more
than one model at a time: to support multiple tenants; to train models on the same data for different
use cases; to support experimentation and architecture or hyper-parameter grid search; and to run
training and evaluation workloads concurrently. The server needs to decide which task to serve to
incoming devices, an instance of a scheduling problem: assigning work (training or evaluation tasks)
to resources (devices). Accordingly, the usual challenges arise: ideal resource assignment should be
fair, avoid starvation, minimize wait times, and support relative priorities all at once.
•Device-side scheduling : As described in Section 7.2, various constraints govern when a device can
connect to the server and execute work. Within these constraints, various scheduling choices can be
made. One extreme is to connect to the server and run computations as often as possible, leading to
high load and resource use on both server and devices. Another choice are ﬁxed intervals, but they
need to be adjusted to reﬂect external factors such as number of devices overall and per round. The
federated learning system developed at Google aims to strike a balance with a ﬂow control mechanism
called pace steering [81] whereby the server instructs devices when to return. Such a dynamic system
enables temporal load balancing for large populations as well as “focusing” connection attempts to
speciﬁc points in time to reach the threshold M0. Developing such a mechanism is difﬁcult due to
stochastic and dynamic nature of device availability, the lack of a predictive model of population
behavior, and feedback loops.
85
Deﬁning reasonable composite objective functions, and designing algorithms to automatically tune these
settings, has not been explored yet in the context of federated learning systems and hence remains a topic of
future research.
7.4 On-Device Runtime
While numerous frameworks exist for data center training, the options for training models on resource con-
strained devices are fairly limited. Machine Learning models and training procedures are typically authored
in a high level language such as Python. For federated learning, this description encompasses device and
server computations that are executed on the target platform and exchange data over a network connection,
necessitating
• A means of serializing and dynamically transmitting local pieces of the total computation (e.g., the
server-side update to the model, or the local client training procedure).
• A means to interpret or execute such a computation on the target platform (server or device).
• A stable network protocol for data exchange between participating devices and servers.
One extreme form of a representation is the original high-level description, e.g. a Python TensorFlow
program [2]. This would require a Python interpreter with TensorFlow backend, which may not be a feasible
choice for end-user devices due to resource constraints (binary size, memory use), performance limitations,
or security concerns.
Another extreme representation of a computation is machine code of the target architecture, e.g. ARM64
instructions. This requires a compiler or re-implementation of a model in a lower-level language such as
C++, and deployment computations will typically be subject to the restrictions that apply to deployment of
binary code (see Section 7.1), introducing prohibitive latencies for executing novel computations.
Intermediate representations that can be compiled or interpreted with a runtime on the target platform
strike a balance between ﬂexibility and efﬁciency. However, such runtimes are currently not widely avail-
able. For instance, Google’s FL system [81] relies on TensorFlow for both server and device side execution
as well as model and parameter transfer, but this choice suffers from several shortcomings:
• It offers no easy path to devices for alternative front ends such as PyTorch [370], JAX [86] or CNTK
[410].
• The runtime is not developed or optimized for resource constrained environments, incurring a large
binary size, high memory use and comparatively low performance.
• The intermediate representation GraphDef used by TensorFlow is not standardized or stable, and
version skew between the frontend and older on-device backends causes frequent compatibility chal-
lenges.
Other alternatives include more specialized runtimes that support only a subset of the frontend’s capa-
bilities, for instance training speciﬁc model types only, requiring changes and long update cycles whenever
new model architectures or training algorithms are to be used. An extreme case would be a runtime that is
limited and optimized to train a single type of model.
An ideal on-device runtime would have the following characteristics:
86
1. Lightweight: small binary size, or pre-installed; low memory and power proﬁle.
2. Performant: low startup latency; high throughput, supports hardware acceleration.
3. Expressive: supports common data types and computations including backpropagation, variables,
control ﬂow, custom extensions.
4. Stable and compact format for expressing data and computations.
5. Widely available: portable open source implementation.
6. Targetable by commonly used ML frameworks / languages..
7. Ideally also supports inference, or if not, building personalized models for an inference runtime.
To our best knowledge no solution exists yet that satisﬁes these requirements, and we expect the limited
ability to run ML training on end user devices to become a hindrance to adoption of federated technologies.
7.5 The Cross-Silo Setting
The system challenges arising in the scenario of cross-silo federated learning take a considerably different
form. As outlined in Table 1, clients are fewer in number, more powerful, reliable, and known / addressable,
eliminating many of the challenges from the cross-device setting, while allowing for authentication and
veriﬁcation, accounting, and contractually enforced penalties for misbehavior. Nonetheless, there are other
sources of heterogeneity, including the features and distribution of data, and possibly the software stack used
for training.
While the infrastructure in the cross-device setting (from the device-side data generation to the server
logic) is typically operated by one or few organizational entities (the application, operating system, or de-
vice manufacturer), in the cross-silo setting, many different entities are involved. This may lead to high
coordination and operational cost due to differences in:
•How data is generated, pre-processed and labeled. Learning across silos will require data normaliza-
tion which may be difﬁcult when such data is collected and stored differently (e.g. use of different
medical imaging systems, and inconsistencies in labeling procedures, annotations, and storage for-
mats).
•Which software at which version powers training. Using the same software stack in every silo—
possibly delivered alongside the model using container technologies as done by FATE [33]—eliminates
compatibility concerns, but such frequent and centrally distributed software delivery may not be ac-
ceptable to all involved parties. An alternative that is more similar to the cross-device setting would be
to standardize data and model formats and communication protocols. See IEEE P3652.1 “Federated
Machine Learning Working Group” for a related effort in this direction.
•The approval process for how data may or may not be used. While this process is typically central-
ized in the cross-device scenario, the situation is likely different in cross-silo settings where many
organizational entities are involved, and may be increasingly difﬁcult when training spans differ-
ent jurisdictions with varying data protection regulations. Technical infrastructure may be of help
here by establishing data annotations that encode access policies, and infrastructure enforce them;
for instance, limiting the use of certain data to speciﬁc models, or encoding minimum aggregation
requirements such as “require at least Mclients per round”.
87
Another potential difference in the cross-silo setting is data partitioning: Data in the cross-device setting
is typically assumed to be partitioned by examples, all of which have the same features (horizontal partition-
ing). In the cross-silo setting, in addition to partitioning by examples, partitioning by features is of practical
relevance (vertical partitioning). An example would be two organizations, e.g. a bank and a retail company,
with an overlapping set of customers, but different information (features) associated with them. For a dis-
cussion focusing on the algorithmic aspects, please see section 2.2. Learning with feature-partitioned data
may require different communication patterns and additional processing steps e.g. for entity alignment and
dealing with missing features.
7.6 Executive Summary
While production grade systems for cross-device federated learning operate successfully [81, 26], various
challenges remain:
• Frequent and large scale deployment of updates, monitoring, and debugging is challenging (Sec-
tion 7.1).
• Differences in device availability induce various forms of bias; deﬁning, quantifying and mitigating
them remains a direction for future research (Section 7.2).
• Tuning system parameters is difﬁcult due to the existence of multiple, potentially conﬂicting objec-
tives (Section 7.3).
• Running ML workloads on end user devices is hampered by the lack of a portable, fast, small footprint,
and ﬂexible runtime for on-device training (Section 7.4).
Systems for cross-silo settings (Section 7.5) face largely different issues owing to differences in the
capabilities of compute nodes and the nature of the data being processed.
88
8 Concluding Remarks
Federated learning enables distributed client devices to collaboratively learn a shared prediction model while
keeping all the training data on device, decoupling the ability to do machine learning from the need to store
the data in the cloud. This goes beyond the use of local models that make predictions on mobile devices by
bringing model training to the device as well.
In recent years, this topic has undergone an explosive growth of interest, both in industry and academia.
Major technology companies have already deployed federated learning in production, and a number of
startups were founded with the objective of using federated learning to address privacy and data collection
challenges in various industries. Further, the breadth of papers surveyed in this work suggests that federated
learning is gaining traction in a wide range of interdisciplinary ﬁelds: from machine learning to optimization
to information theory and statistics to cryptography, fairness, and privacy.
Motivated by the growing interest in federated learning research, this paper discusses recent advances
and presents an extensive collection of open problems and challenges. The system constraints impose efﬁ-
ciency requirements on the algorithms in order to be practical, many of which are not particularly challeng-
ing in other settings. We argue that data privacy is not binary and present a range of threat models that are
relevant under a variety of assumptions, each of which provides its own unique challenges.
The open problems discussed in this work are certainly not comprehensive, they reﬂect the interests
and backgrounds of the authors. In particular, we do not discuss any non-learning problems which need
to be solved in the course of a practical machine learning project, and might need to be solved based on
decentralized data [382]. This can include simple problems such as computing basic descriptive statistics,
or more complex objectives such as computing the head of a histogram over an open set [510]. Existing
algorithms for solving such problems often do not always have an obvious “federated version” that would
be efﬁcient under the system assumptions motivating this work or do not admit a useful notion of data
protection. Yet another set of important topics that were not discussed are the legal and business issues that
may motivate or constrain the use of federated learning.
We hope this work will be helpful in scoping further research in federated learning and related areas.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Alex Ingerman and David Petrou for their useful suggestions and insightful
comments during the review process.