methods
for computing on encrypted data were developed starting in the early 1980s [396, 492], and Agrawal and
Srikant [11] and Vaidya et al. [457] are early examples of work that sought to learn from local data using
a centralized server while preserving privacy. Conversely, even since the introduction of the term federated
learning, we are aware of no single work that directly addresses the full set of FL challenges. Thus, the term
federated learning provides a convenient shorthand for a set of characteristics, constraints, and challenges
that often co-occur in applied ML problems on decentralized data where privacy is paramount.
This paper originated at the Workshop on Federated Learning and Analytics held June 17–18th, 2019,
hosted at Google’s Seattle ofﬁce. During the course of this two-day event, the need for a broad paper
surveying the many open challenges in the area of federated learning became clear.1
A key property of many of the problems discussed is that they are inherently interdisciplinary — solving
them likely requires not just machine learning, but techniques from distributed optimization, cryptography,
security, differential privacy, fairness, compressed sensing, systems, information theory, statistics, and more.
Many of the hardest problems are at the intersections of these areas, and so we believe collaboration will be
essential to ongoing progress. One of the goals of this work is to highlight the ways in which techniques from
these ﬁelds can potentially be combined, raising both interesting possibilities as well as new challenges.
Since the term federated learning was initially introduced with an emphasis on mobile and edge device
applications [337, 334], interest in applying FL to other applications has greatly increased, including some
which might involve only a small number of relatively reliable clients, for example multiple organizations
collaborating to train a model. We term these two federated learning settings “cross-device” and “cross-silo”
respectively. Given these variations, we propose a somewhat broader deﬁnition of federated learning:
Federated learning is a machine learning setting where multiple entities (clients) collaborate
in solving a machine learning problem, under the coordination of a central server or service
provider. Each client’s raw data is stored locally and not exchanged or transferred; instead,
1During the preparation of this work, Li et al. [301] independently released an excellent but less comprehensive survey.
4
focused updates intended for immediate aggregation are used to achieve the learning objective.
Focused updates are updates narrowly scoped to contain the minimum information necessary for the speciﬁc
learning task at hand; aggregation is performed as early as possible in the service of data minimization. We
note that this deﬁnition distinguishes federated learning from fully decentralized (peer-to-peer) learning
techniques as discussed in Section 2.1.
Although privacy-preserving data analysis has been studied for more than 50 years, only in the past
decade have solutions been widely deployed at scale (e.g. [177, 154]). Cross-device federated learning and
federated data analysis are now being applied in consumer digital products. Google makes extensive use of
federated learning in the Gboard mobile keyboard [376, 222, 491, 112, 383], as well as in features on Pixel
phones [14] and in Android Messages [439]. While Google has pioneered cross-device FL, interest in this
setting is now much broader, for example: Apple is using cross-device FL in iOS 13 [25], for applications
like the QuickType keyboard and the vocal classiﬁer for “Hey Siri” [26]; doc.ai is developing cross-device
FL solutions for medical research [149], and Snips has explored cross-device FL for hotword detection
[298].
Cross-silo applications have also been proposed or described in myriad domains including ﬁnance risk
prediction for reinsurance [476], pharmaceuticals discovery [179], electronic health records mining [184],
medical data segmentation [15, 139], and smart manufacturing [354].
The growing demand for federated learning technology has resulted in a number of tools and frameworks
becoming available. These include TensorFlow Federated [38], Federated AI Technology Enabler [33],
PySyft [399], Leaf [35], PaddleFL [36] and Clara Training Framework [125]; more details in Appendix A.
Commercial data platforms incorporating federated learning are in development from established technology
companies as well as smaller start-ups.
Table 1 contrasts both cross-device and cross-silo federated learning with traditional single-datacenter
distributed learning across a range of axes. These characteristics establish many of the constraints that
practical federated learning systems must typically satisfy, and hence serve to both motivate and inform the
open challenges in federated learning. They will be discussed at length in the sections that follow.
These two FL variants are called out as representative and important examples, but different FL settings
may have different combinations of these characteristics. For the remainder of this paper, we consider the
cross-device FL setting unless otherwise noted, though many of the problems apply to other FL settings as
well. Section 2 speciﬁcally addresses some of the many other variations and applications.
Next, we consider cross-device federated learning in more detail, focusing on practical aspects common
to a typical large-scale deployment of the technology; Bonawitz et al. [81] provides even more detail for a
particular production system, including a discussion of speciﬁc architectural choices and considerations.
1.1 The Cross-Device Federated Learning Setting
This section takes an applied perspective, and unlike the previous section, does not attempt to be deﬁnitional.
Rather, the goal is to describe some of the practical issues in cross-device FL and how they might ﬁt into a
broader machine learning development and deployment ecosystem. The hope is to provide useful context
and motivation for the open problems that follow, as well as to aid researchers in estimating how straight-
forward it would be to deploy a particular new approach in a real-world system. We begin by sketching the
lifecycle of a model before considering a FL training process.
5
Datacenter
distributed learningCross-silo
federated learningCross-device
federated learning
Setting Training a model on a large
but “ﬂat” dataset. Clients
are compute nodes in a sin-
gle cluster or datacenter.Training a model on siloed data.
Clients are different organiza-
tions (e.g. medical or ﬁnancial)
or geo-distributed datacenters.The clients are a very large number of
mobile or IoT devices.
Data
distributionData is centrally stored and
can be shufﬂed and balanced
across clients. Any client can
read any part of the dataset.Data is generated locally and remains decentralized. Each client stores
its own data and cannot read the data of other clients. Data is not indepen-
dently or identically distributed.
Orchestration Centrally orchestrated. A central orchestration server/service organizes the training , but never
sees raw data.
Wide-area
communicationNone (fully connected
clients in one datacen-
ter/cluster).Typically a hub-and-spoke topology, with the hub representing a coordi-
nating service provider (typically without data) and the spokes connecting
to clients.
Data
availabilityAll clients are almost always available. Only a fraction of clients are available at
any one time, often with diurnal or other
variations.
Distribution
scaleTypically 1 - 1000 clients. Typically 2 - 100 clients. Massively parallel, up to 1010clients.
Primary
bottleneckComputation is more often
the bottleneck in the datacen-
ter, where very fast networks
can be assumed.Might be computation or com-
munication.Communication is often the primary
bottleneck, though it depends on the
task. Generally, cross-device federated
computations use wi-ﬁ or slower con-
nections.
Addressability Each client has an identity or name that allows the system to
access it speciﬁcally.Clients cannot be indexed directly (i.e.,
no use of client identiﬁers).
Client
statefulnessStateful — each client may participate in each round of the com-
putation, carrying state from round to round.Stateless — each client will likely par-
ticipate only once in a task, so gener-
ally a fresh sample of never-before-seen
clients in each round of computation is
assumed.
Client
reliabilityRelatively few failures. Highly unreliable — 5% or more of the
clients participating in a round of com-
putation are expected to fail or drop out
(e.g. because the device becomes ineli-
gible when battery, network, or idleness
requirements are violated).
Data partition
axisData can be partitioned / re-
partitioned arbitrarily across
clients.Partition is ﬁxed. Could be
example-partitioned (horizontal)
or feature-partitioned (vertical).Fixed partitioning by example (horizon-
tal).
Table 1: Typical characteristics of federated learning settings vs. distributed learning in the datacenter (e.g. [150]).
Cross-device and cross-silo federated learning are two examples of FL domains, but are not intended to be exhaustive.
The primary deﬁning characteristics of FL are highlighted in bold, but the other characteristics are also critical in
determining which techniques are applicable.
6
clients server 
engineers 
& analysts 
model 
deployment model 
testing 
federated 
learning rest of 
the world admin Figure 1: The lifecycle of an FL-trained model and the various actors in a federated learning system. This
ﬁgure is revisited in Section 4 from a threat models perspective.
1.1.1 The Lifecycle of a Model in Federated Learning
The FL process is typically driven by a model engineer developing a model for a particular application. For
example, a domain expert in natural language processing may develop a next word prediction model for
use in a virtual keyboard. Figure 1 shows the primary components and actors. At a high level, a typical
workﬂow is:
1.Problem identiﬁcation: The model engineer identiﬁes a problem to be solved with FL.
2.Client instrumentation: If needed, the clients (e.g. an app running on mobile phones) are instru-
mented to store locally (with limits on time and quantity) the necessary training data. In many cases,
the app already will have stored this data (e.g. a text messaging app must store text messages, a photo
management app already stores photos). However, in some cases additional data or metadata might
need to be maintained, e.g. user interaction data to provide labels for a supervised learning task.
3.Simulation prototyping (optional): The model engineer may prototype model architectures and test
learning hyperparameters in an FL simulation using a proxy dataset.
4.Federated model training: Multiple federated training tasks are started to train different variations
of the model, or use different optimization hyperparameters.
5.(Federated) model evaluation: After the tasks have trained sufﬁciently (typically a few days, see
below), the models are analyzed and good candidates selected. Analysis may include metrics com-
puted on standard datasets in the datacenter, or federated evaluation wherein the models are pushed to
held-out clients for evaluation on local client data.
6.Deployment: Finally, once a good model is selected, it goes through a standard model launch process,
including manual quality assurance, live A/B testing (usually by using the new model on some devices
and the previous generation model on other devices to compare their in-vivo performance), and a
7
Total population size 106–1010devices
Devices selected for one round of training 50 – 5000
Total devices that participate in training one model 105–107
Number of rounds for model convergence 500 – 10000
Wall-clock training time 1 – 10 days
Table 2: Order-of-magnitude sizes for typical cross-device federated learning applications.
staged rollout (so that poor behavior can be discovered and rolled back before affecting too many
users). The speciﬁc launch process for a model is set by the owner of the application and is usually
independent of how the model is trained. In other words, this step would apply equally to a model
trained with federated learning or with a traditional datacenter approach.
One of the primary practical challenges an FL system faces is making the above workﬂow as straight-
forward as possible, ideally approaching the ease-of-use achieved by ML systems for centralized training.
While much of this paper concerns federated training speciﬁcally, there are many other components in-
cluding federated analytics tasks like model evaluation and debugging. Improving these is the focus of
Section 3.4. For now, we consider in more detail the training of a single FL model (Step 4 above).
1.1.2 A Typical Federated Training Process
We now consider a template for FL training that encompasses the Federated Averaging algorithm of McMa-
han et al. [337] and many others; again, variations are possible, but this gives a common starting point.
A server (service provider) orchestrates the training process, by repeating the following steps until train-
ing is stopped (at the discretion of the model engineer who is monitoring the training process):
1.Client selection: The server samples from a set of clients meeting eligibility requirements. For
example, mobile phones might only check in to the server if they are plugged in, on an unmetered
wi-ﬁ connection, and idle, in order to avoid impacting the user of the device.
2.Broadcast: The selected clients download the current model weights and a training program (e.g. a
TensorFlow graph [2]) from the server.
3.Client computation: Each selected device locally computes an update to the model by executing the
training program, which might for example run SGD on the local data (as in Federated Averaging).
4.Aggregation: The server collects an aggregate of the device updates. For efﬁciency, stragglers might
be dropped at this point once a sufﬁcient number of devices have reported