FieldSAFE: Dataset for Obstacle Detection in Agriculture
Mikkel Kragh∗1, Peter Christiansen∗1, Morten S. Laursen1, Morten Larsen2, Kim
A. Steen3, Ole Green3, Henrik Karstoft1 and Rasmus N. Jørgensen1
1Department of Engineering, Aarhus University, Denmark
2Conpleks Innovation ApS, Struer, Denmark
3AgroIntelli, Aarhus, Denmark
Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel multi-modal
dataset for obstacle detection in agriculture. The
dataset comprises approximately 2 hours of raw sen-
sor data from a tractor-mounted sensor system in a
grass mowing scenario in Denmark, October 2016.
Sensing modalities include stereo camera, thermal
camera, web camera, 360-degree camera, lidar, and
radar, while precise localization is available from
fused IMU and GNSS. Both static and moving obsta-
cles are present including humans, mannequin dolls,
rocks, barrels, buildings, vehicles, and vegetation.
All obstacles have ground truth object labels and
geographic coordinates.
Keywords — dataset, agriculture, obstacle
detection, computer vision, cameras, stereo,
thermal, lidar, radar, tracking
I.
Introduction
For the past few decades, precision agriculture
has revolutionized agricultural production sys-
tems. Part of the development has focused
on robotic automation, to optimize workﬂow
and minimize manual labor. Today, technol-
ogy is available to automatically steer farming
vehicles such as tractors and harvesters along
predeﬁned paths using accurate global naviga-
tion sattelite systems (GNSS) [2]. However, a
human is still needed to monitor the surround-
ings and intervene when potential obstacles
appear in front of the vehicle to ensure safety.
In order to completely eliminate the need for
a human operator, autonomous farming vehi-
cles need to operate both efﬁciently and safely
∗{mkha,pech}@eng.au.dk
Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Figure 1: Recording platform surrounded by static and
moving obstacles. Multiple drone views record
the exact position of obstacles, while the record-
ing platform records local sensor data.
without any human intervention. A safety sys-
tem must perform robust obstacle detection
and avoidance in real-time with high reliability.
And multiple sensing modalities must com-
plement each other in order to handle a wide
range of changes in illumination and weather
conditions.
A technological advancement like this re-
quires extensive research and experiments to
investigate combinations of sensors, detection
algorithms, and fusion strategies. Currently, a
few R&D projects exist within companies that
seek to commercialize the concept [5, 3, 13].
1
arXiv:1709.03526v1  [cs.RO]  11 Sep 2017
FieldSAFE
However, to our knowledge, no public plat-
forms or datasets are available that address the
important issues of obstacle detection in an
agricultural environment.
Within urban autonomous driving, a number
of datasets have recently been made publicly
available. Udacity’s Self-Driving Car Engineer
Nanodegree program has given rise to multi-
ple challenge datasets including stereo camera,
lidar, and localization data [1, 21, 20]. A few
research institutions such as the University of
Surrey [8], Linköping University [12], Oxford
[14], and Virginia Tech [11] have published sim-
ilar datasets. Most of the above cases, however,
only address behavioural cloning, such that
ground truth data are only available for con-
trol actions of the vehicles. No information is
thus available for potential obstacles and their
location in front of the vehicles.
The KITTI dataset [10], however, addresses
these issues with object annotations in both 2D
and 3D. Today, it is the de facto standard for
benchmarking both single- and multi-modality
object detection and recognition systems for
autonomous driving. The dataset includes a
high-resolution stereo camera, a 360-degree
camera, a lidar, and fused GNSS/IMU sensor
data.
Focusing speciﬁcally on image data, an even
larger selection of datasets is available with an-
notations of typical object categories such as
cars, pedestrians, and bicycles. Annotations of
cars are often represented by bounding boxes
[15, 4]. However, pixel-level annotation or se-
mantic segmentation has the advantage of be-
ing able to capture all objects, regardless of
their shape and orientation. Some of these are
synthetically generated images using computer
graphic engines that are automatically anno-
tated [19, 9], whereas others are natural images
that are manually labeled [7, 16].
In agriculture, currently no similar datasets
are publicly available. While some similari-
ties between autonomous urban driving and
autonomous farming are present, essential dif-
ferences exist. An agricultural environment is
often unstructured or semi-structured, whereas
urban driving involves planar surfaces, often
accompanied by lane lines and trafﬁc signs.
Further, distinction between traversable, non-
traversable and processable terrain is often nec-
essary in an agricultural context such as grass
mowing, weed spraying, or harvesting. Here,
tall grass or high crops protruding from the
ground may actually be traversable and pro-
cessable, whereas ordinary object categories
such as humans, animals, and vehicles are
not. In urban driving, however, a simpliﬁed
traversable/non-traversable representation is
common, as all protruding objects are typi-
cally regarded as obstacles. Therefore, sens-
ing modalities and detection algorithms that
work well in urban driving, do not necessarily
work well in an agricultural setting. Ground
plane assumptions common for 3D sensors
may break down when applied on rough ter-
rain or high grass. And vision-based detection
algorithms may fail when faced with visually
camouﬂaged objects such as animals and vege-
tation typical in a natural environment.
In this paper, we present a ﬂexible, multi-
modal sensing platform and a dataset for ob-
stacle detection in agriculture. The platform is
mounted on a tractor and includes stereo cam-
era, thermal camera, web camera, 360-degree
camera, lidar, and radar. Precise localization is
further available from fused IMU and GNSS.
The dataset includes approximately 2 hours of
recordings from a grass mowing scenario in
Denmark, October 2016. Both static and mov-
ing obstacles are present including humans,
mannequin dolls, rocks, barrels, buildings, ve-
hicles, and vegetation. Ground truth positions
of all obstacles were recorded with a drone dur-
ing operation and have subsequently been man-
ually labeled and synchronized with all sensor
data. The dataset can be downloaded from
https://vision.eng.au.dk/fieldsafe/.
II.
Sensor Setup
Figure
2
shows
the
recording
platform
mounted on a tractor during grass mowing.
The platform consists of the exteroceptive
sensors listed in Table 1, the proprioceptive
sensors listed in Table 2, and a Conpleks
2
FieldSAFE
Figure 2: Recording platform.
Table 1: Exteroceptive sensors.
Sensor
Model
Resolution
FOV
Range
Data rate
Stereo camera
Multisense S21
CMV2000
1024 x 544
85◦x 50◦
1.5-50m
10 fps
Web camera
Logitech HD Pro C920
1920 x 1080
70◦x 43◦
-
20 fps
360-degree camera
Giroptic 360cam
2048 x 833
360◦x 292◦
-
30 fps
Thermal camera
Flir A65, 13 mm lens
640 x 512
45◦x 37◦
-
30 fps
Lidar
Velodyne HDL-32E
2172 x 32
360◦x 40◦
1-100 m
10 fps
Radar
Delphi ESR
32 targets/frame
90◦x 4.2◦
20◦x 4.2◦
0-60 m
0-174 m
20 fps
Table 2: Proprioceptive sensors.
Sensor
Model
Description
GPS
Trimble BD982 GNSS
Dual antenna RTK GPS system. Measures po-
sition and horizontal heading of the platform.
IMU
Vectornav VN-100
Measures acceleration, angular velocity, mag-
netic ﬁeld, and barometric pressure.
Robotech Controller 701 controller used for
data collection with the Robot Operating
System (ROS) [18].
Figure 3 illustrates a
synchronized pair of frames from stereo
camera,
360-degree camera,
web camera,
thermal camera, and lidar.
Synchronization.
Trigger signals for the
stereo and thermal cameras were synchronized
and generated from a PPS signal from an
internal GNSS in the lidar, which allowed
exact timestamps for all three sensors. The
remaining
sensors
were
synchronized
in
software using a best effort approach in ROS.
Registration.
The lidar and the stereo
camera were registered with Iterative Closest
Point (ICP) as an average over multiple static
scenes. The stereo and thermal cameras were
registered using a custom made visual-thermal
checkerboard.
The remaining sensors were
registered by hand, by estimating extrinsic
parameters of their positions.
For a more
detailed description, we refer the reader to [6].
3
FieldSAFE
(a) Stereo image
(b) Stereo pointcloud
(c) 360-degree camera image (cropped)
(d) Web camera image
(e) Thermal camera image (cropped)
(f) Lidar point cloud (cropped and colored by height)
Figure 3: Example frames from the FieldSAFE dataset.
4
FieldSAFE
III.
Dataset
The dataset consists of approximately 2 hours
of recordings during grass mowing in Den-
mark, October 25th 2016. The exact position
of the ﬁeld was 56.066742, 8.386255 (latitude,
longitude). Figure 4a shows a map of the ﬁeld
with tractor paths overlaid. The ﬁeld is 3.3 ha
and surrounded by roads, shelterbelts, and a
private property.
A number of static obstacles exempliﬁed
in Figure 5 were placed on the ﬁeld prior to
recording.
They included mannequin dolls
(adults and children), rocks, barrels, buildings,
vehicles, and vegetation. Figure 4b shows the
placement of static obstacles on the ﬁeld over-
laid on a ground truth map colored by object
classes.
Additionally, a session with moving obsta-
cles was recorded where four humans were
told to walk in random patterns.
Figure 6
shows the four subjects and their respective
paths on a subset of the ﬁeld. The subset cor-
responds to the white tractor tracks in Figure
4a. The humans crossed the path of the tractor
a number of times, thus emulating dangerous
situations that must be detected by a safety
system. Along the way, various poses such as
standing, sitting, and lying were represented.
During the entire traversal and mowing of
the ﬁeld, data from all sensors were recorded.
Along with video from a hovering drone, a
static orthophoto from another drone, and cor-
responding manually annotated class labels,
these are all available from the FieldSAFE web-
site.
IV.
Ground Truth
Ground truth information on object location
and class labels for both static and moving ob-
stacles is available as timestamped global (ge-
ographic) coordinates. By transforming local
sensor data from the tractor into global coordi-
nates, a simple look-up of class label into the
annotated ground truth map is possible.
Prior to traversing and mowing the ﬁeld,
a number of custom-made markers were dis-
(a) Orthophoto with tractor tracks overlaid. Black
tracks include only static obstacles, whereas red
and white tracks also have moving obstacles. Cur-
rently, red tracks have no ground truth for moving
obstacles annotated.
(b) Labeled orthophoto
Figure 4: Colored and labeled orthophotos.
5
FieldSAFE
Figure 5: Examples of static obstacles.
(a) Human 1
(b) Human 2
(c) Human 3
(d) Human 4
Figure 6: Examples of moving obstacles (from the stereo camera) and their paths (black) overlaid on tractor path (grey).
tributed on the ground and measured with
exact global coordinates using a handheld Top-
con GRS-1 RTK GNSS. A DJI Phantom 4 drone
was used to take overlapping bird’s-eye view
images of an area covering the ﬁeld and its
surroundings. Pix4D [17] was used to stitch
the images and generate a high-resolution or-
thophoto (Figure 4a) with a ground sampling
distance (GSD) of 2 cm. The orthophoto was
manually labeled pixel-wise as either grass,
6
FieldSAFE
ground, road, vegetation, building, GPS marker,
barrel, human, or other (Figure 4b). Using the
GPS coordinates of the markers and their cor-
responding positions in the orthophoto, a map-
ping between GPS coordinates and pixel coor-
dinates was estimated.
For annotating the location of moving obsta-
cles, a DJI Matrice 100 was used to hover ap-
proximately 75 m above the ground while the
tractor traversed the ﬁeld. The drone recorded
video at 25 fps with a resolution of 1920x1080.
Due to limited battery capacity, the recording
was split into two sessions of each 20 minutes.
The videos were manually synchronized with
sensor data from the tractor by introducing
physical synchronization events in front of the
tractor in the beginning and end of each ses-
sion. Using the 7 GPS markers that were visible
within ﬁeld of view of the drone, the videos
were stabilized and warped to a bird’s-eye view
of a subset of the ﬁeld. As described above for
the static orthophoto, GPS coordinates of the
markers and their corresponding positions in
the videos were then used to generate a map-
ping between GPS coordinates and pixel co-
ordinates. Finally, the moving obstacles were
manually annotated in each frame of one of
the videos using the vatic video annotation
tool [22]. Figure 6 shows the path of each ob-
ject overlaid on a subset of the orthophoto. The
second video is yet to be annotated.
V.
Summary and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented a calibrated
and synchronized multi-modal dataset for ob-
stacle detection in agriculture. We envision
the dataset to facilitate a wide range of future
research within autonomous agriculture and
obstacle detection for farming vehicles.
In future work, we plan on annotating the
remaining session with moving obstacles. Ad-
ditionally, we would like to extend the dataset
with more scenarios from various agricultural
environments while widening the range of
encountered illumination and weather condi-
tions.
Currently, all annotations reside in a global
coordinate system.
Projecting these annota-
tions to local sensor frames inevitably causes
localization errors. Therefore, we would like to
extend annotations with e.g object bounding
boxes for each sensor.
References
[1] Didi Data Release #2 - Round 1 Test Se-
quence and Training.
[2] Aziz Z. Abidine, Brian C. Heidman,
Shrini K. Upadhyaya, and David J. Hills.
Autoguidance system operated at high
speed causes almost no tomato damage.
California Agriculture, 58(1):44–47, jan 2004.
[3] ASI. Autonomous Solutions. https://
www.asirobots.com/farming/, 2016. Ac-
cessed: 2017-08-09.
[4] Claudio Carafﬁ, Tomas Vojir, Jura Trefny,
Jan Sochman, and Jiri Matas. A System
for Real-time Detection and Tracking of
Vehicles from a Single Car-mounted Cam-
era. In ITS Conference, pages 975–982, Sep.
2012.
[5] Case IH.
Case IH Autonomous Con-
cept Vehicle.
http://www.caseih.com/
apac/en-in/news/pages/2016-case-ih-
premieres-concept-vehicle-at-farm-
progress-show.aspx, 2016.
Accessed:
2017-08-09.
[6] P. Christiansen, M. Kragh, K. A. Steen,
H. Karstoft, and R. N. Jørgensen. Plat-
form for evaluating sensors and human
detection in autonomous mowing opera-
tions. Precision Agriculture, 18(3):350–365,
Jun 2017.
[7] Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebas-
tian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus En-
zweiler, Rodrigo Benenson, Uwe Franke,
Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele.
The
cityscapes dataset for semantic urban
scene understanding. In Proc. of the IEEE
7
FieldSAFE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[8] DIPLECS.
DIPLECS
Autonomous
Driving
Datasets.
http://
ercoftac.mech.surrey.ac.uk/data/
diplecs/, 2015. Accessed: 2017-08-31.
[9] A Gaidon, Q Wang, Y Cabon, and E Vig.
Virtual worlds as proxy for multi-object
tracking analysis. In CVPR, 2016.
[10] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph
Stiller, and Raquel Urtasun. Vision meets
robotics: The kitti dataset. International
Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), 2013.
[11] InSight.
InSight SHRP2.
https://
insight.shrp2nds.us/, 2017. Accessed:
2017-08-31.
[12] Philipp Koschorrek, Tommaso Piccini, Per
Öberg, Michael Felsberg, Lars Nielsen,
and Rudolf Mester. A multi-sensor trafﬁc
scene dataset with omnidirectional video.
In Ground Truth - What is a good dataset?
CVPR Workshop 2013, 2013.
[13] Kubota.
Kubota.
http://www.kubota-
global.net/news/2017/20170125.html,
2017. Accessed: 2017-08-16.
[14] Will Maddern, Geoff Pascoe, Chris Line-
gar, and Paul Newman. 1 Year, 1000km:
The Oxford RobotCar Dataset. The Inter-
national Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR),
36(1):3–15, 2017.
[15] Kevin
Matzen
and
Noah
Snavely.
Nyc3dcars: A dataset of 3d vehicles in
geographic context. In Proc. Int. Conf. on
Computer Vision, 2013.
[16] Gerhard
Neuhold,
Tobias
Ollmann,
Samuel Rota Bulò, and Peter Kontschieder.
The mapillary vistas dataset for semantic
understanding of street scenes. In Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
2017.
[17] Pix4D. Pix4D. http://pix4d.com/, 2014.
Accessed: 2017-09-05.
[18] Morgan Quigley, Ken Conley, Brian P.
Gerkey, Josh Faust, Tully Foote, Jeremy
Leibs, Rob Wheeler, and Andrew Y. Ng.
Ros: an open-source robot operating sys-
tem. In ICRA Workshop on Open Source
Software, 2009.
[19] German
Ros,
Laura
Sellart,
Joanna
Materzynska, David Vazquez, and An-
tonio Lopez. The SYNTHIA Dataset: A
large collection of synthetic images for
semantic segmentation of urban scenes.
2016.
[20] Udacity and Didi.
Udacity Didi $100k
Challenge Dataset 1.
[21] Inc. Udacity.
Udacity Didi Challenge -
Round 2 Dataset.
[22] Carl Vondrick, Donald Patterson, and
Deva Ramanan.
Efﬁciently scaling up
crowdsourced video annotation. Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Vision, 101(1):184–
204, 2013.
8
