Designing and Implementing Data Warehouse
for Agricultural Big Data
Vuong M. Ngo, Nhien-An Le-Khac, and M-Tahar Kechadi
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin,
Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
vuong.ngo@ucd.ie, an.lekhac@ucd.ie, tahar.kechadi@ucd.ie
Abstract. In recent years, precision agriculture that uses modern infor-
mation and communication technologies is becoming very popular. Raw
and semi-processed agricultural data are usually collected through vari-
ous sources, such as: Internet of Thing (IoT), sensors, satellites, weather
stations, robots, farm equipment, farmers and agribusinesses, etc. Be-
sides, agricultural datasets are very large, complex, unstructured, het-
erogeneous, non-standardized, and inconsistent. Hence, the agricultural
data mining is considered as Big Data application in terms of volume,
variety, velocity and veracity. It is a key foundation to establishing a
crop intelligence platform, which will enable resource eﬃcient agronomy
decision making and recommendations. In this paper, we designed and
implemented a continental level agricultural data warehouse by combin-
ing Hive, MongoDB and Cassandra. Our data warehouse capabilities: (1)
ﬂexible schema; (2) data integration from real agricultural multi datasets;
(3) data science and business intelligent support; (4) high performance;
(5) high storage; (6) security; (7) governance and monitoring; (8) repli-
cation and recovery; (9) consistency, availability and partition tolerant;
(10) distributed and cloud deployment. We also evaluate the performance
of our data warehouse.
Keywords: Business intelligent, data warehouse, constellation schema,
Big Data, precision agriculture.
1
Introduction
In 2017 and 2018, annual world cereal productions were 2,608 million tons [32]
and 2,595 million tons [6], respectively. However, there were also around 124
million people in 51 countries faced food crisis and food insecurity [7]. According
to United Nations [31], we need an increase 60% of cereal production to meet 9.8
billion people needs by 2050. To satisfy the massively increase demand for food,
crop yields must be signiﬁcantly increased by using new farming approaches,
such as precision agriculture. As reported in [5], precision agriculture is vitally
important for the future and can make a signiﬁcant contribution to food security
and safety. Besides, precision agriculture promises both high quantity and quality
of its products with minimum of resource usage, such as water, energy, fertilisers,
and pesticides [28].
arXiv:1905.12411v1  [cs.DB]  29 May 2019
The precision agriculture’s current mission is to use the decision-support
system based on Big Data approaches to provide precise information for more
control of farming eﬃciency and waste, such as awareness, understanding, advice,
early warning, forecasting and ﬁnancial services. An eﬃcient agricultural data
warehouse (DW) is required to extract useful knowledge and support decision-
making. However, currently there are very few reports in the literature that
focus on the design of eﬃcient DWs with the view to enable Agricultural Big
Data analysis and mining. The design of large scale agricultural DWs is very
challenging. Moreover, the precision agriculture system can be used by diﬀerent
kinds of users at the same time, for instance by both farmers and agronomists.
Every type of user needs to analyse diﬀerent information sets thus requiring
speciﬁc analytics. The agricultural data has all the features of Big Data:
1. Volume: The amount of agricultural data is rapidly increasing and is inten-
sively produced by endogenous and exogenous sources. The endogenous data
is collected from operation systems, experimental results, sensors, weather
stations, satellites and farm equipment. The systems and devices in the agri-
cultural ecosystem can connect through IoT. The exogenous data concerns
the external sources, such as farmers, government agencies, retail agronomists
and seed companies. They can help with information about local pest and
disease outbreak tracking, crop monitoring, market accessing, food security,
products, prices and knowledge.
2. Variety: Agricultural data has many diﬀerent forms and formats, such as
structured and unstructured data, video, imagery, chart, metrics, geo-spatial,
multi-media, model, equation and text.
3. Velocity: The produced and collected data increases at high rate, as sens-
ing technologies and other mobile devices are becoming more eﬃcient and
cheaper. The datasets must be cleaned, aggregated and harmonised in real-
time.
4. Veracity: The tendency of agronomic data is uncertain, inconsistent, am-
biguous and error prone because the data is gathered from heterogeneous
sources, sensors and manual processes.
In this research, ﬁrstly, we analyze popular DWs to handle agricultural Big
Data. Secondly, an agricultural DW is designed and implemented by combin-
ing Hive, MongoDB, Cassandra, and constellation schema on real agricultural
datasets. Our DW has enough main features of a DW for agricultural Big Data.
These are: (1) high storage, high performance and cloud computing adapt for the
volume and velocity features; (2) ﬂexible schema and integrated storage struc-
ture to adapt the variety feature; (3) data ingestion, pre-processing, governance,
monitoring and security adapt for the veracity feature. Thirdly, the eﬀective busi-
ness intelligent support is illustrated by executing complex HQL/SQL queries
to answer diﬃcult data analysis requests. Besides, an experimental evaluation
is conducted to present good performance of our DW storage. The rest of this
paper is organised as follows: in the next Section, we reviewed the related work.
In Sections 3, 4, and 5, we presented solutions for the above goals, respectively.
Finally, Section 6 gives some concluding remarks.
2
Related Work
Data mining can be used to design an analysis process for exploiting big agricul-
tural datasets. Recently, many papers have been published that exploit machine
learning algorithms on sensor data and build models to improve agricultural
economics, such as [24], [25], [8] and [26]. In these, the paper [24] predicted crop
yield by using self-organizing-maps supervised learning models; namely super-
vised Kohonen networks, counter-propagation artiﬁcial networks and XY-fusion.
The paper [25] predicted drought conditions by using three rule-based machine
learning; namely random forest, boosted regression trees, and Cubist. The paper
[8] estimated water evapotranspiration by using extreme learning machine and
generalized regression neural network models which based on daily temperature
data in six meteorological stations. Finally, the paper [26] predicted pest popu-
lation dynamics by using time series clustering and structural change detection
which detected groups of diﬀerent pest species. However, the proposed solutions
are not satisﬁed the problems of agricultural Big Data, such as data integration,
data schema, storage capacity, security and performance.
From a Big Data point of view, the papers [15] and [27] have proposed smart
agricultural frameworks. In [15], the platform used Hive to store and analyse
sensor data about land, water and biodiversity which can help increase food
production with lower environmental impact. In [27], the authors moved to-
ward a notion of climate analytics-as-a-service by building a high-performance
analytics and scalable data management platform which is based on modern
infrastructures, such as Amazon web services, Hadoop and Cloudera. However,
the two papers did not discuss how to build and implement a DW for a precision
agriculture.
Our approach is inspired by papers [30], [29], [21] and [20] which presented
ways of building a DW for agricultural data. In [30], the authors extended entity-
relationship model for modelling operational and analytical data which is called
the multi-dimensional entity-relationship model. They introduced new represen-
tation elements and showed the extension of an analytical schema. In [29], a
relational database and an RDF triple store, were proposed to model the overall
datasets. In that, the data are loaded into the DW in RDF format, and cached in
the RDF triple store before being transformed into relational format. The actual
data used for analysis was contained in the relational database. However, as the
schemas in [30] and [29] were based on entity-relationship models, they cannot
deal with high-performance, which is the key feature of a data warehouse.
In [21], a star schema model was used. All data marts created by the star
schemas are connected via some common dimension tables. However, a star
schema is not enough to present complex agricultural information and it is dif-
ﬁcult to create new data marts for data analytics. The number of dimensions of
DW proposed by [21] is very small; only 3-dimensions namely, Species, Location,
and Time. Moreover, the DW concerns livestock farming. Overcoming disadvan-
tages of the star schema, the paper [20] proposed a constellation schema for
an agricultural DW architecture in order to facilitate quality criteria of a DW.
However, it does not describe how to implement the proposed DW.
3
Analyzing Cassandra, MongoDB and Hive in
agricultural Big Data
In general, a DW is a federated repository for all the data that an enterprise
can collect through multiple heterogeneous data sources belonging to various
enterprise’s business systems or external inputs [9], [14]. A quality DW should
adapt many important criteria [1], [16], such as: (1) Making information easily
accessible; (2) Presenting and providing right information at the right time; (3)
Integrating data and adapting to change; (4) Achieving tangible and intangible
beneﬁts; (5) Being a secure bastion that protects the information assets; and (6)
Being accepted by DW users. So, to build an eﬃcient agricultural DW, we need
to take into account these criteria.
Currently, there are many popular databases that support eﬃcient DWs,
such as such as Redshift, Mesa, Cassandra, MongoDB and Hive. Hence, we are
analyzing the most popular and see which is the best suited for our data prob-
lem. In these databases, Redshift is a fully managed, petabyte-scale DW service
in the cloud which is part of the larger cloud-computing platform Amazon Web
Services [2]. Mesa is highly scalable, petabyte data warehousing system which is
designed to satisfy a complex and challenging set of users and systems require-
ments related to Googles Internet advertising business [10]. However, Redshift
and Mesa are not open source. While, Cassandra, MongoDB and Hive are open
source databases, we want to use them to implement agriculture DW. Hence-
forth, the Cassandra and MongoDB terms are used to refer to DWs of Cassandra
and MongoDB databases.
There are many papers studying Cassandra, MongoDB and Hive in the view
of general DWs. In the following two subsections, we present advantages, dis-
advantages, similarities and diﬀerences between Cassandra, MongoDB and Hive
in the context of agricultural DW. Specially, we analyze to ﬁnd how to combine
these DWs together to build a DW for agricultural Big Data, not necessarily
best DW.
3.1
Advantages and disadvantages
Cassandra, MongoDB and Hive are used widely for enterprise DWs. Cassandra1
is a distributed, wide-column oriented DW from Apache that is highly scal-
able and designed to handle very large amounts of structured data. It provides
high availability with no single point of failure, tuneable and consistent. Cas-
sandra oﬀers robust support for transactions and ﬂexible data storage based on
ideas of DynamoDB and BigTable [12], [18]. While, MongoDB2 is a powerful,
cross-platform, document oriented DW that provides, high performance, high
availability, and scalability [3], [13]. It works on concept of collection and doc-
ument, JSON-like documents, with dynamic schemas. So, documents and data
structure can be changed over time. Secondly, MongoDB combines the ability
to scale out with features, such as ad-hoc query, full-text search and secondary
1 http://cassandra.apache.org
2 http://mongodb.com
index. This provides powerful ways to access and analyze datasets. Hive3 is an
SQL data warehouse infrastructure on top of Hadoop4 for writing and running
distributed applications to summarize Big Data [4], [17]. Hive can be used as an
online analytical processing (OLAP) system and provides tools to enable data
extract - transform - load (ETL). Hive’s metadata structure provides a high-
level, table-like structure on top of HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System).
That will signiﬁcantly reduce the time to perform semantic checks during the
query execution. Moreover, by using Hive Query Language (HQL), similar to
SQL, users can make simple queries and analyse the data easily.
Although, the three DWs have many advantages and have been used widely,
they have major limitations. These limitations impact heavily on their use as
agricultural DW.
1. In Cassandra: (1) Query Language (CQL) does not support joint and sub-
query, and has limited support for aggregations that are diﬃcult to analyze
data; (2) Ordering is done per-partition and speciﬁed at table creation time.
The sorting of thousands or millions of rows can be fast in development but
sorting billion ones is a bad idea; (3) A single column value is recommended
not be larger than 1MB that is diﬃcult to contain videos or high quality
images, such as LiDAR images, 3-D images and satellite images.
2. In MongoDB: (1) The maximum BSON document size is 16MB that is dif-
ﬁcult to contain large data such as video, audio and high quality image; (2)
JSONs expressive capabilities are limited because the only types are null,
boolean, numeric, string, array, and object; (3) We cannot automatically
rollback more than 300 MB of data. If we have more than that, manual
intervention is needed.
3. Hive is not designed for: (1) Online transaction processing; (2) Real-time
queries; (3) Large data on network; (4) Trivial operations; (5) Row-level
update; and (6) Iterative execution.
3.2
Feature Comparison
Table 1 lists technical features used to compare Hive, MongoDB and Cassandra.
For the ten overview features given in section A of Table 1, the three DWs diﬀer
in data schema, query language and access methods. However, they all support
map reduce. Moreover, the ETL feature is supported by Hive, limited to Cassan-
dra and unsupported by MongoDB. The full-text search feature is only supported
by MongoDB. The secondary index and ad-hoc query features are supported by
Hive and MongoDB but not or restricted by Cassandra. The 9th feature being
the Consistency
Availability
Partition tolerant classiﬁcation (CAP) theorem
says how the database system behaves when facing network instability. It implies
that in the presence of a network partition, one has to choose between consis-
tency and availability. Hive and Cassandra choose availability. While, MongoDB
chooses consistency. Finally, the structure of Hive and MongoDB are master -
slave while Cassandra has peer - to - peer structure.
3 http://hive.apache.org
4 http://hadoop.apache.org
Table 1. Technical Features
No.
Features
Hive
MongoDB
Cassandra
A. Overview Features
1
Data scheme
Yes
No-Schema
Flexible Schema
2
Query language
HQL
JS-like syntax
CQL
3
Accessing method
JDBC, ODBC, Thrift
JSON
Thrift
4
Map reduce
Yes
Yes
Yes
5
ETL
Yes
No
Limited
6
Full-text search
No
Yes
No
7
Ad-hoc query
Yes
Yes
No
8
Secondary index
Yes
Yes
Restricted
9
CAP
AP
CP
AP
10
Structure
Master Slave
Master Slave
Peer to Peer
B. Industrial Features
1
Governance
Yes (via Hadoop)
Yes
Yes (via JME)
2
Monitoring
Yes
Yes
Yes
3
Data Lifecycle Management
Yes (via Hadoop)
Yes
Yes
4
Workload Management
Yes
Yes
Yes
5
Replication-Recovery
Yes
Yes
Yes
The section B of Table 1 describes ﬁve industrial features, such as governance,
monitoring, data lifecycle management, workload management, and replication-
recovery. All of Hive, MongoDB and Cassandra support these features. Hive
supports governance and data lifecycle management features via Hadoop. Cas-
sandra is based on Java Management Extensions (JME) for governance.
Table 2. Data Management and Data Warehouse Features
No.
Features
Hive
MongoDB Cassandra
A. Data Management Features
1
Security
Yes
Yes
Yes
2
High Storage Capacity
Yes (best)
Yes
Yes
3
Data Ingestion and Pre-processing
Yes
Yes
No
B. Data Warehouse Features
1
Business Intelligent
Very good
Limited
Good
2
Data Science
Very good
Limited
Limited
3
High Performance
Non-real time
Real time
Real time
The data management and DW features are described in section A and sec-
tion B of Table 2, respectively. The data management features are security, high
storage capacity, and data ingestion and pre-processing. The DWs have support
for these features, except Cassandra does not support for data ingestion and
pre-processing. Hive has the best for high storage capacity. The DW features are
business intelligent, data science and high performance. Hive supports well busi-
ness intelligent and data science but it is not suitable for real-time performance.
MongoDB is very fast but it is limited in supporting for business intelligent and
data science. Cassandra also is very fast and supports business intelligent but
has limited capabilities for data science.
4
Agricultural Data Warehouse
The general architecture of a typical DW includes four separate and distinct
modules being Raw Data, ETL, Integrated Information and Data Mining. In
the scope of this paper, we focus on the Integrated Information module which
is a logically a centralised repository. It includes DW storage, data marts, data
cubes and OLAP engine.
The DW storage is organised, stored and accessed using a suitable schema
deﬁned in the metadata. It can be either directly accessed or used to creating
data marts which is usually oriented to a particular business function or enter-
prise department. A data cube is a data structure that allows fast analysis of
data according to the multiple dimensions that deﬁne a business problem. The
data cubes are created by the OLAP engine.
4.1
OLAP
OLAP is a category of software technology that provides the insight and un-
derstanding of data in multiple dimensions through fast, consistent, interactive
access to enable analysts or managers to make better decisions. By using roll-
up, drill-down, slice-dice and pivot operations, OLAP performs multidimensional
analysis in a wide variety of possible views of information that provide complex
calculations, trend analysis and sophisticated data modelling with a short exe-
cution time. So, OLAP is a key way to exploit information in a DW to allow
end-users to analyze and explore data in multidimensional views.
The OLAP systems are categorised into three types: namely relational OLAP
(ROLAP), multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP) and hybrid OLAP (HOLAP):
1. ROLAP uses relational or extended-relational database management system
to store and manage DW. It can contain large amounts of data and inherit
existing functionalities in the relational database.
2. MOLAP uses array-based multidimensional storage engines for multidimen-
sional views of data, rather than in a relational database. So, it can perform
complex calculations with good performance. Besides, it is usually used as
an OLAP engine for a DW which is built on a multidimensional schema.
3. HOLAP is a combination of both ROLAP and MOLAP. It uses both rela-
tional and multidimensional techniques to inherit the higher scalability of
ROLAP and the faster computation of MOLAP.
In our agricultural Big Data context, HOLAP is more suitable than ROLAP
and MOLAP because:
1. ROLAP has quite slow performance. Each ROLAP report is an SQL query in
the relational database that requires a signiﬁcant execution time. In addition,
ROLAP does not meet all the users’ needs, especially complex queries.
2. MOLAP requires that all calculations should be performed during the data
cube construction. So, it handles only a limited amount of data and does not
scale well. In addition, MOLAP is not capable of handling detailed data.
3. HOLAP inherits relational technique of ROLAP to store large data volumes
and detailed information. Additionally, HOLAP also inherits multidimen-
sional techniques of MOLAP to perform complex calculations and has good
performance.
4.2
The Proposed Architecture
Based on the analyis in Section 3, Hive is chosen for building our DW storage
and it is combining with MongoDB to implement our Integrated Information
module. This is for the following reasons:
1. Hive is based on Hadoop which is the most powerful tool of Big Data. Besides,
HQL is similar to SQL which is familiar to the majority of users. Especially,
Hive supports well high storage capacity, business intelligent and data science
more than MongoDB and Cassandra. These features of Hive are useful to
make an agricultural DW and apply data mining technologies.
2. Hive does not have real-time performance so it needs to be combined with
MongoDB or Cassandra to improve performance of our Integrated Informa-
tion module.
3. MongoDB is more suitable than Cassandra to complement Hive because: (1)
MongoDB supports joint operation, full text search, ad-hoc query and second
index which are helpful to interact with users. While Cassandra does not
support these features; (2) MongoDB has the same master slave structure
with Hive that is easy to combine. While the structure of Cassandra is peer
- to - peer; (3) Hive and MongoDB are more reliable and consistent. So the
combination between Hive and MongoDB supports fully the CAP theorem
while Hive and Cassandra are the same AP systems.
Fig. 1. Our agricultural data warehouse architecture
Our DW architecture for agricultural Big Data is illustrated in Figure 1
which contains three modules, namely Integrated Information, Products and
Raw Data. The Integrated Information module includes two components being
MongoDB component and Hive component. Firstly, the MongoDB component
will receive real-time data, such as user data, logs, sensor data or queries from
Products module, such as web application, web portal or mobile app. Besides,
some results which need to be obtained in real-time will be transferred from
the MongoDB to Products. Second, the Hive component will store the online
data from and send the processed data to the MongoDB module. Some kinds
of queries having complex calculations will be sent directly to Hive. After that,
Hive will send the results directly to the Products module.
In Raw Data module, almost data in Operational Databases or External
Data components is loaded into Cassandra component. It means that we use
Cassandra to represent raw data storage. This improves the performance of ETL
and helps us deploy our system on cloud or distributed systems better.
Fig. 2. A part of our data warehouse schema for Precision Agriculture
4.3
Our Schema
The DW uses schema to logically describe the entire datasets. A schema is a col-
lection of objects, including tables, views, indexes, and synonyms which consist
of some fact and dimension tables [22]. The DW schema can be designed through
the model of source data and the requirements of users. There are three kind of
schemas, namely star, snowﬂake and constellation. With features of agricultural
data, the agricultural DW schema needs to have more than one fact table and
be ﬂexible. So, the constellation schema, also known galaxy schema, is selected
to design our DW schema.
We developed a constellation schema for our agricultural DW and it is par-
tially described in Figure 2. It includes 3 fact tables and 19 dimension tables.
The FieldFact fact table contains data about agricultural operations on ﬁelds.
The Order and Sale fact tables contain data about farmers’ trading operations.
The FieldFact, Order and Sale facts have 12, 4 and 4 dimensions, and have 6,
6 and 5 measures, respectively. While, dimension tables contain details about
each instance of an object involved in a crop yield. The main attributes of these
dimension tables are described in the Table 3. The key dimension tables are con-
nected to their fact table. However, there are some dimension tables connected
to more than one fact table, such as Crop and Farmer. Besides, the CropState,
Inspection and Site dimension tables are not connected to any fact table. The
CropState and Inspection tables are used to support the Crop table. While, the
Site table supports the Field table.
Table 3. Descriptions of some dimension tables
No.
Dim. tables
Particular attributes
1
Business
BusinessID, Name,Address, Phone, Mobile, Email
2
Crop
CropID, CropName, VarietyID, VarietyName, EstYield, SeasontSart, Seaso-
nEnd, BbchScale, ScientiﬁcName, HarvestEquipment, EquipmentWeight
3
CropState
CropStateID, CropID, StageScale, Height, MajorStage, MinStage, MaxStage,
Diameter, MinHeight, MaxHeight, CropCoveragePercent
4
Farmer
FarmerID, FarmerName, Address, Phone, Mobile, Email
5
Fertiliser
FertiliserID, Name, Unit, Status, Description, GroupName
6
Field
FieldID, FieldName, SiteID, Reference, Block, Area, AreaUnit, WorkingArea,
WorkingAreaUnit, FieldGPS, Notes
7
Inspection
InspectionID, CropID, Description, ProblemType, Severity, ProblemNotes,
AreaValue, AreaUnit, Order, Date, Notes, GrowthStage
8
Nutrient
NutrientID, NutrientName, Date, Quantity
9
OperationTime OperationTimeID, StartDate, EndDate, Season
10
Pest
PestID, CommonName, ScientiﬁcName, PestType, Description, Density, Min-
Stage, MaxStage, Coverage, CoverageUnit
11
Plan
PlanID,
PlanName,
PlanNumber,
RegistrationNo,
ProductName,
Produc-
tRate, Date, WaterVolume
12
Product
ProductID, ProductName, GroupName
13
Site
SiteID, FarmerID, SiteName, Reference, Country, AddressName, AddressTown,
PostalCode, GPS, Created, CreatedBy
14
Spray
SprayID, SprayProductName, ProductRate, AppliedArea, AppliedDate, Wa-
terVolume, VolumeUnit, ConﬁrmDuration, ConﬁrmWindSPeed, ConﬁrmDirec-
tion, ConﬁrmTemperature, ConﬁrmHumidity, ActivityType
15
Soil
SoilID, PH, Phosphorus, Potassium, Magnesium, Calcium, CEC, Silt, Clay,
Sand, TextureLabel, TestDate
16
Supplier
SupplierID, SupplierName, SupplierContactName, Address, ContactPhone,
ContactMobile, ContactEmail
17
Task
TaskID, TaskDesc, TaskStatus, TaskDate, TaskInterval, CompletedDate, App-
Code
18
Treatment
TreatmentID, TreatmentName, FormType, LotCode, Rate, ApplCode, LevlNo,
Type, Description, ApplDesc, TreatmentComment
19
WeatherStation WeatherStationID, StationName, MeasureDate, AirTemperature, SoilTemper-
ature, StationReadingBatch
5
Experiments
Through the proposed architecture in Section 4.2, our DW inherited many ad-
vantages from Hive, MongoDB and Cassandra presented in Section 3, such as
high performance, high storage, large scale analytic and security. In the scope
of this paper, we evaluated our DW schema and data analysis capacity on real
agricultural datasets through complex queries. In addition, the time performance
of our agricultural DW storage was also evaluated and compared to MySQL on
many particular built queries belonging to diﬀerent query groups.
5.1
Data Analyzing Demo
Fig. 3. Data in UK and Ireland [23]
The input data for the DW was pri-
marily obtained from an agronomy
company which supplies data from
its operational systems, research re-
sults and ﬁeld trials. Specially, we
are supplied real agricultural data in
iFarms, B2B sites, technology cen-
tres and demonstration farms. Their
speciﬁc positions in several Euro-
pean countries are presented in Fig-
ures 3 and 4 [23]. There is a to-
tal of 29 datasets. On average, each
dataset contains 18 tables and is
about 1.4 GB in size. The source
datasets are loaded on our CONSUS
DW Storage based on the schema
described in Section 4.3 through an
ETL tool. From the DW storage, we
can extract and analyze useful in-
formation through tasks using com-
plex HQL queries or data mining al-
gorithms. These tasks could not be
executed if the separate 29 datasets
have not been integrated into our DW storage.
An example for a complex request: ”List crops, fertilisers, corresponding
fertiliser quantities in spring, 2017 in every ﬁeld and site of 3 farmers (crop
companies) who used the large amount of Urea in spring, 2016”. In our schema,
this query can be executed by a HQL/SQL query as shown in Figure 5. To
execute this request, the query needs to exploit data in the FieldFact fact table
and the six dimension tables, namely Crop, Field, Site, Farmer, Fertiliser and
OperationTime. The query consists of two subqueries. It returned 3 farmers
(crop companies) that used the largest amount of Urea in spring, 2016.
Fig. 4. Data in Continental Europe [23]
Fig. 5. A screenshort of executing the query example in our Hive
5.2
Performance Analysis
The performance analysis was implemented using MySQL 5.7.22, JDK 1.8.0 171,
Hadoop 2.6.5 and Hive 2.3.3 which run on Bash on Ubuntu 16.04.2 on Windows
10. All experiments were run on a laptop with an Intel Core i7 CPU (2.40
GHz) and 16 GB memory. We only evaluate reading performance of our DW
storage because a DW is used for reporting and data analysis. The database of
our storage is duplicated into MySQL to compare performance. By combining
popular HQL/SQL commands, namely Where, Group by, Having, Left (right)
Join, Union and Order by, we create 10 groups for testing. Every group has 5
queries and uses one, two or more commands (see Table 4). Besides, every query
also uses operations, such as And, Or, ≥, Like, Max, Sum and Count, to combine
with the commands.
All queries were executed three times and we took the average value of the
these executions. The diﬀerent times in runtime between MySQL and our storage
of query qi is calculated as Timesqi = RT mysql
qi
/RT ours
qi
. Where, RT mysql
qi
and
RT ours
qi
are respectively average runtimes of query qi on MySQL and our storage.
Besides, with each group Gi, the diﬀerent times in runtime between MySQL
and our storage TimesGi = RT mysql
Gi
/RT ours
Gi
. Where, RTGi = Average(RTqi)
is average runtime of group Gi on MySQL or our storage.
Table 4. Command combinations of queries
Group Queries Where Group by Having Left (right) Joint Union Order by
1
1 - 5
x
2
6 - 10
x
x
3
11 - 15
x
x
4
16 - 20
x
x
5
21 - 25
x
x
6
26 - 30
x
x
x
7
31 - 35
x
x
x
8
36 - 40
x
x
x
x
9
41 - 45
x
x
x
x
x
10
45 - 50
x
x
x
x
x
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
1
Queries (qi)
Diﬀerent times (Timesqi)
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group 6
Group 7
Group 8
Group 9
Group 10
Fig. 6. Diﬀerent times between MySQL and our storage in runtime every Query
Figure 6 and Figure 7 describe diﬀerent times in runtime in every query
belongs to 10 groups and every group. Unsurprisingly, although running on one
computer, but with large data volume, our storage is faster than MySQL at
46/50 queries and all 10 query groups. MySQL is faster than our storage at
3 queries 12th, 13th and 18th belonging to groups 3rd and 4th. Two databases
are same at the query 25th belonging to group 5th. Comparing to MySQL, our
storage is more than at most (6.24 times) at group 1st which uses only Where
command, and at least (1.22 times) at group 3rd which uses Where and Joint
commands.
0
2
4
6
8
10
2
4
6
Mean
6.24
2.92
1.22
2.86
2.27
4.66
3.36
4.63
3.16
1.56
3.19
Groups (Gi)
Diﬀerent times (TimesGi)
Fig. 7. Diﬀerent times between MySQL and our storage in runtime of every group
Figure 8 presents the average runtime of the 10 query groups on MySQL and
our storage. Mean, the run time of a reading query on MySQL and our storage
is 687.8 seconds and 216.1 seconds, respectively. It means that our storage is
faster 3.19 times. In the future, by deploying our storage solution on cloud or
distributed systems, we believe that the performance will be even much better
than MySQL.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 Mean
0
500
1,000
1,081.5
599.7
111.7
790.4776.6
1,109.2
483
1,057.3
297.9
571.1
687.8
173.4205.2
91.2
276.4342.8
238
143.7
228.3
94.2
366.4
216.1
Groups
Average runtimes (seconds)
MySQL
Our storage
Fig. 8. Average Runtimes of MySQL and our storage in every Groups
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we compared and analyzed some existing popular open source DWs
in the context of agricultural Big Data. We designed and implemented the agri-
cultural DW by combining Hive, MongoDB and Cassandra DWs to exploit their
advantages and overcome their limitations. Our DW includes necessary mod-
ules to deal with large scale and eﬃcient analytics for agricultural Big Data.
Additionally, the presented schema herein was optimised for the real agricul-
tural datasets that were made available to us. The schema been designed as a
constellation so it is ﬂexible to adapt to other agricultural datasets and quality
criteria of agricultural Big Data. Moreover, using the short demo, we outlined a
complex HQL query that enabled knowledge extraction from our DW to opti-
mize of agricultural operations. Finally, through particular reading queries using
popular HQL/SQL commands, our DW storage outperforms MySQL by far.
In the future works, we shall pursue the deployment of our agricultural DW
on a cloud system and implement more functionalities to exploit this DW. The
future developments will include: (1) Sophisticated data mining techniques to de-
termine crop data characteristics and combine with expected outputs to extract
useful knowledge; (2) Predictive models based on machine learning or graph al-
gorithms [11]; (3) An intelligent interface for data access; (4) Combination with
the high-performance knowledge map framework [19].
Acknowledgment
This research is part of the CONSUS research programme which is funded under
the SFI Strategic Partnerships Programme (16/SPP/3296) and is co-funded by
Origin Enterprises Plc.
References
1. Adelman, S., Moss, L.: Data warehouse project management, 1st edition. Addison-
Wesley Professional (2000)
2. Amazon team: Amazon Redshift database developer guide. Samurai ML (2018)
3. Chodorow, K.: MongoDB: The deﬁnitive guide, 2nd edition (powerful and scalable
data storage). O’Reilly Media (2013)
4. Du, D.: Apache Hive essentials, 2nd edition. Packt Publishing (2018)
5. Eurobarometer team: Europeans, agriculture and the common agricultural policy.
Special Eurobarometer 440, The European Commission (2016)
6. FAO-CSDB team: Global cereal production and inventories to decline but over-
all supplies remain adequate, release date: December 06, 2018. Cereal Supply and
Demand Brief, FAO (2018)
7. FAO-FSIN team: Global report on food crises 2018. Food Security Information
Network, FAO (2018)
8. Feng, Y., et al.: Modeling reference evapotranspiration using extreme learning ma-
chine and generalized regression neural network only with temperature data. Com-
puters and Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 136, pp. 71-78 (2017)
9. Golfarelli, M., Rizzi, S.: Data warehouse design: modern principles and methodolo-
gies. McGraw-Hill Education (2009)
10. Gupta, A., et al.: Mesa: a geo-replicated online data warehouse for Google’s ad-
vertising system. Communications of the ACM, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 117-125 (2016)
11. Helmer, S., Ngo, V. M.: A Similarity Measure for Weaving Patterns in Textiles. In
Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pp. 163-172 (2015)
12. Hewitt, E., Carpenter, J.: Cassandra: the deﬁnitive guide, 2nd edition (distributed
data at web scale). O’Reilly Media (2016)
13. Hows, D., et al.: The deﬁnitive guide to MongoDB, 3rd edition (a complete guide
to dealing with big data using MongoDB). Apress (2015)
14. Inmon, W. H.: Building the data warehouse. Wiley (2005)
15. Kamilaris, A., et al.: Estimating the environmental impact of agriculture by means
of geospatial and big data analysis. Science to Society, pp. 39-48 (2018)
16. Kimball, R., Ross, M.: The data warehouse toolkit: the deﬁnitive guide to dimen-
sional modeling (3rd edition). Wiley (2013)
17. Lam, C. P., et al.: Hadoop in action, 2nd edition. Manning (2016)
18. Neeraj, N.: Mastering Apache Cassandra, 2nd edition. Packt Publishing (2015)
19. Ngo, V. M., Cao, T.H.: Discovering Latent Concepts and Exploiting Ontological
Features for Semantic Text Search. In Proceedings of the 5th IJCNLP, ACL An-
thology, pp. 571-579 (2011)
20. Ngo, V. M., et al.: An eﬃcient data warehouse for crop yield prediction. The 14th
International Conference Precision Agriculture (ICPA-2018), pp. 3:1-3:12 (2018)
21. Nilakanta, S., et al.: Dimensional issues in agricultural data warehouse designs.
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 60, No. 2, pp. 263-278 (2008)
22. Oracle team: Database data warehousing guide, Oracle12c doc release 1 (2017)
23. Origin team: Annual report and accounts, Origin Enterprises plc (2018)
24. Pantazi, X. E.: Wheat yield prediction using machine learning and advanced sens-
ing techniques. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 121, pp. 57-65 (2016)
25. Park, S., et al.: Drought assessment and monitoring through blending of multi-
sensor indices using machine learning approaches for diﬀerent climate regions. Agri-
cultural and Forest Meteorology, Vol. 216, pp. 157-169 (2016)
26. Rupnik, R., et al.: AgroDSS: a decision support system for agriculture and farming.
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture (2018)
27. Schnase, J., et al.: MERRA analytic services: meeting the big data challenges of
climate science through cloud-enabled climate analytics-as-a-service. Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems, Vol. 61, pp. 198-211 (2017)
28. Schrijver, R., et al.: Precision agriculture and the future of farming in Europe.
Report of STOA, Science Foresight Unit, European Union (2016)
29. Schuetz, C. G., et al.: Building an active semantic data warehouse for precision
dairy farming. Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, 28(2) (2018)
30. Schulze, C., et al.: Data modelling for precision dairy farming within the com-
petitive ﬁeld of operational and analytical tasks. Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture, Vol. 59, No. 1-2, pp. 39-55 (2007)
31. UN team: World population projected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050, and 11.2 billion
in 2100. Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, United Nations (2017)
32. USDA report: World agricultural supply and demand estimates 08/2018. United
States Department of Agriculture (2018)
