Meaningful human control: actionable
properties for AI system development
Luciano Cavalcante Siebert1,2*†, Maria Luce
Lupetti1,3,1†, Evgeni Aizenberg1,2†, Niek Beckers1,4†, Arkady
Zgonnikov1,4†, Herman Veluwenkamp1,5, David
Abbink1,4, Elisa Giaccardi1,3, Geert-Jan Houben1,2, Catholijn
M. Jonker1,2, Jeroen van den Hoven1,5, Deborah Forster1
and Reginald L. Lagendijk1,2
1AiTech Interdisciplinary Research Program on Meaningful
Human Control, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands.
2Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer
Science, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
3Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering, Delft University of
Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
4Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering,
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
5Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management, Delft University
of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):
L.CavalcanteSiebert@tudelft.nl;
†Co-ﬁrst authors.
Abstract
How can humans remain in control of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)-based
systems designed to perform tasks autonomously? Such systems are
increasingly ubiquitous, creating beneﬁts - but also undesirable situa-
tions where moral responsibility for their actions cannot be properly
1
arXiv:2112.01298v2  [cs.CY]  19 May 2022
2
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
attributed to any particular person or group. The concept of mean-
ingful human control has been proposed to address responsibility gaps
and mitigate them by establishing conditions that enable a proper
attribution of responsibility for humans; however, clear requirements
for researchers, designers, and engineers are yet inexistent, making the
development of AI-based systems that remain under meaningful human
control challenging. In this paper, we address the gap between philo-
sophical theory and engineering practice by identifying, through an
iterative process of abductive thinking, four actionable properties for
AI-based systems under meaningful human control, which we discuss
making use of two applications scenarios: automated vehicles and AI-
based hiring. First, a system in which humans and AI algorithms interact
should have an explicitly deﬁned domain of morally loaded situations
within which the system ought to operate. Second, humans and AI
agents within the system should have appropriate and mutually com-
patible representations. Third, responsibility attributed to a human
should be commensurate with that human’s ability and authority to
control the system. Fourth, there should be explicit links between the
actions of the AI agents and actions of humans who are aware of their
moral responsibility. We argue that these four properties will support
practically-minded professionals to take concrete steps toward designing
and engineering for AI systems that facilitate meaningful human control.
Keywords: Artiﬁcial intelligence, AI Ethics, Meaningful Human Control,
Moral responsibility, Socio-technical systems
1 Introduction
Deploying AI algorithms in human-inhabited environments comes with the risk
of inappropriate, undesirable, or unpredictable consequences [1, 2]. The misin-
terpreted skills of AI systems, combined with their rapid impact in public and
private spheres of life, can lead to situations with a clear misalignment between
human moral values and societal norms [3–6], and where moral responsibility
for such undesired impacts can often not be properly attributed to any person
[7].
How can designers, users, or other human agents be morally responsible
for systems
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
3
that are designed to perform tasks, learn, and adapt without direct human
control? The strong technical drive towards achieving systems which can act
independently from human control in more scenarios, does not necessarily
include considerations about the socio-technical consequences of implementing
these systems, especially in terms of facilitating moral responsibility. In agree-
ment with the hybrid intelligence community [8], we believe a stronger focus on
human-AI systems (systems in which humans and AI algorithms interact dur-
ing operation) is needed to address the complex design issue of ethical use and
implementation of AI [9]. The very features that make AI algorithms useful
complicate their assessment and predictability in the complex socio-technical
context in which they operate - which changes over time. As a result, all sys-
tems based on AI, especially those with so-called higher “levels of autonomy” 1,
can and should be designed for appropriate human responsibility [11]. The holy
grail is to design these systems in a manner that can mitigate the occurrence
of situations that the manufacturer was in principle unable to anticipate, and
that users were not able to appropriately inﬂuence or even realize.
The problem of designing for human responsibility over human-AI systems
is challenging because such systems operate in complex social infrastruc-
tures that include organizational processes with both human-to-human and
human-AI interactions, policy, and law. Designing for moral responsibility
therefore requires a systemic, socio-technical perspective that jointly consid-
ers the interaction between all these elements [12]. This fundamental challenge
of intertwined social, physical, and technical infrastructures does not exclu-
sively concern AI: societies have settled on morally acceptable solutions for
ubiquitous technology in other domains, such as medicine and aviation safety.
1“Level of autonomy” is a complex construct. In line with Bradshaw’s seven deadly myths of
autonomy [10], we acknowledge that measuring autonomy on a single ordered scale of increas-
ing levels is insuﬃcient because it lacks context, is not human-centred, and disregard functional
diﬀerences, among other reasons.
4
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
However, these solutions do not readily generalize to systems based on
AI algorithms, due to properties such as: (1) learning abilities; (2) black-box
nature; (3) impact on many stakeholders (even those not using the systems
themselves); and (4) autonomous or semi-autonomous decision-making fea-
tures. First, AI agents can demonstrate novel behavior through learning from
historical data and continuous learning via interactions with the world and
other agents. Because the world we are concerned with is an open system with
respect to the the agents’ perceptions and actions, the behavior of human-
AI systems cannot be predicted with precision over time [13, 14]. Second, the
agent’s decision-making process may be diﬃcult to explain and predict, even
for its programmer [15], complicating responsibility attribution for its conse-
quences. Third, as AI agents may interact with multiple users, which have
diﬀerent levels of expertise, diﬀerent preferences, and understanding, responsi-
bility can become a diﬀuse concept for which no one feels morally engaged. This
may be further exacerbated when AI agent’s autonomous features are overesti-
mated by those interacting with it. As the system’s design process may overlap
with implementation and use [16], interactions may end up including humans
who did not choose to be involved in its use, as in the case of sidewalk pedes-
trians interacting with automated vehicles. Fourth, as systems based on AI
with increasing autonomous decision-making features operate with reduced or
even no meaningful supervision, undesirable impacts might be perceived only
in hindsight. Learning abilities, opacity, interaction with many stakeholders,
and autonomous or semi-autonomous features are just four of the prominent
issues, which emerge as algorithms interact with social environments.
To design for moral responsibility and human control is particularly impor-
tant as quick development and immediate deployment “in the wild” [17],
instead of regulated tests procedures, is urging academia and governments to
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
5
take a stance in deﬁning visions for trustworthy AI [5]. In fact, even if the
“move fast and break things” mantra was considered acceptable and received
wide consensus for driving digital innovation in the last decade, the same can-
not be for AI with autonomous features [18]. A failure of an AI agent is not
a “404 error page”. It is a car accident, most likely with fatalities [19, 20]; it
is an unfair and discriminatory distribution of wealth and services [21]; it is
an unjust crime accusation based on ethnicity [22, 23]. Designers and devel-
opers of AI systems can only tackle this challenge by acknowledging upfront
that successful attribution and apportioning of responsibility is not a matter
of fortuitous allocation of praise or blame.
The concept of meaningful human control [11, 24–26] was ﬁrst proposed
to address the problem of responsibility gaps in autonomous weapon systems,
but is becoming a central concept when discussing responsible AI [11].The core
idea is that humans should ultimately remain in control of, and thus morally
responsible for, the behavior of human-AI systems 2. Nevertheless, meaningful
human control has also received the critique to be an ill-deﬁned concept [29]
that ignores operational context [30] and does not provide concrete design
guidelines [12].
This article aims to contribute to closing the gap between the theory of
meaningful human control, as proposed by [11], and the practice of design-
ing and developing human-AI systems by proposing four actionable properties
that can be addressed throughout the system’s lifecycle. We start by unpack-
ing the philosophical concept of meaningful human control (Section 2). We
then present a set of four properties that were generated through an iterative
2Meaningful human control relates not only to the engineering of the AI agent, but also to
the design of the socio-technical environment that surrounds it, including social and institutional
practices [11, 27, 28]. As [12] elaborate, “[intelligent] devices themselves play an important role
but cannot be considered without accounting for the numerous human agents, their physical
environment, and the social, political and legal infrastructures in which they are embedded.”
6
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
process of abductive thinking that combined the diﬀerent disciplinary perspec-
tives of the authors (engineering, computer science, philosophy of technology,
ethnography and design). We describe each property and illustrate how each of
them helps deﬁning whether and to what extent a human-AI system is under
meaningful human control. We also suggest concrete methods and tools that
can support addressing each property and illustrate them with respect to two
case studies: automated vehicles and AI-based hiring (Section 3). Finally, we
discuss the systemic and socio-technical nature of these properties and the need
for transdisciplinary practices (Section 4) and conclude the paper (Section 5).
2 Meaningful human control: tracking and
tracing
The concept of meaningful human control was coined in the debates on
autonomous weapon systems [24, 25]. At the heart of this concept is the idea
that humans need to retain control and moral responsibility over autonomous
systems. This discussion is no longer exclusive to the military domain. Mean-
ingful human control is increasingly relevant in other domains as AI agents
become more ubiquitous and autonomous, especially in non-forgiving scenar-
ios in which fundamental human rights and safety are at stake. The concept
has already been discussed on the context of automated vehicles [12, 31, 32],
including truck platooning [33], surgical robots [34], smart home systems [35],
medical diagnosis [36], and content moderation in social media [37].
Although many authors agree on the need for some form of human control
over AI agents [11, 24, 25, 30], these same authors may diverge and often dis-
agree about what makes human control meaningful. Observing the theoretical
challenges of specifying what meaningful human control means, Santoni de Sio
and Van den Hoven [11] laid out a foundation for a theory of meaningful human
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
7
control with an adaptation of Fischer and Ravizza’s [38] philosophical account
on guidance control, moral responsibility, and free will. Following the ideals of
responsible innovation [39] and value-sensitive design [40], a centerpiece of San-
toni de Sio’s and Van den Hoven’s conception of meaningful human control is
two necessary conditions for meaningful human control, tracking and tracing:
(1) Tracking condition: in order to be under meaningful human control, a
human-AI system should be responsive to the human moral reasons rele-
vant in the circumstances. A human-AI system that fulﬁlls this condition
is said to track the relevant human moral reasons.
(2) Tracing condition: in order for a human-AI system to be under meaningful
human control, its behavior, capabilities, and possible eﬀects in the world
should be traceable to a proper moral and technical understanding on the
part of at least one relevant human agent who designs or interacts with
the system.
In the tracking condition, control is said to be meaningful when the system’s
performance co-varies with the reasons of the relevant person or persons, like a
mercury column in a thermometer co-varies with the temperature in the room.
When air humidity varies, but the temperature remains constant, we expect
no change in the mercury column, since it only tracks temperature. Similarly,
when someone always accepts a new job only because the salary is higher, that
person tracks ﬁnancial gain, not necessarily the job’s intrinsic reward.
For the tracing condition, it is required that this relevant person or persons
are in a position to have a proper moral and technical understanding of the
system. That would not be the case if the thermometer would randomly induce
changes in the mercury column, or if the concept of the mercury expanding
or contracting is entirely unknown to the person. Similarly, a supervisor of an
8
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
automated vehicle that does not understand traﬃc rules, would not have such
understanding.
The tracking and tracing conditions take the concept of meaningful human
control one step closer to support practical design and development because
they provide high-level design requirements for a human-AI system to be under
meaningful human control. Building on this conception, researchers developed
frameworks to analyze and quantify factors aﬀecting meaningful human control
for automated vehicles [12, 41, 42]. However, a description of general system-
level properties that could support operationalization of tracking and tracing
conditions in diverse contexts is yet to be speciﬁed.
3 Four properties of human-AI systems under
meaningful human control
The tracking and tracing conditions [11] provide a philosophical grounding
for informing the development of human-AI systems under meaningful human
control. Yet, translating these philosophical concepts into a concrete design
and engineering practice is far from trivial. For instance, the tracking con-
dition suggests that a human-AI system should be responsive to the moral
reasons of a relevant human. But, how do we deﬁne the relevant human in a
given circumstance? How should a given AI system recognize a moral reason-
ing? Does the condition imply that every AI system should be designed to be
morally sensitive [43]? The tracing condition implies the necessity of a proper
moral and technical understanding from at least one relevant human interact-
ing and designing the system. Does this imply that the AI system should be
able to recognize if and when an interacting human has such proper moral and
technical understanding? Or, does this imply that we need protocols for the
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
9
design and use of AI systems that deﬁne if and when a human can and must
have such understanding?
In an eﬀort to answer these questions — and more — the authors, a
group of researchers from various backgrounds (engineering, computer science,
philosophy of technology, ethnography and design), engaged in an iterative
process of abductive thinking [44]. Speciﬁcally, we built on Dorst’s conceptual
framework of abductive thinking [45], where both a desired value (meaningful
human control) and a working principle (tracking & tracing conditions) are
known, to brainstorm ideas of what the solutions to achieve these might be.
The generated ideas were then grouped into thematic areas and synthesized
into actionable properties. It has to be noted, however, that although this work
explores the solution space of the framework, our aim is rather to provide a
contribution that sits on a meta-level, in between the what and the how (see
Figure 1).
Fig. 1 The diagram, based on the framework of abductive thinking by Dorst [45], illustrat-
ing the positioning of the abductive thinking we performed in search for a solution space
that would meet the claimed need for meaningful human control.
Speciﬁcally, as a result of our abductive thinking where we collectively
reﬂected on what strategic and engineering solutions would enable the two
10
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
necessary conditions of meaningful human control [11], we identiﬁed a set of
four actionable properties. In the following subsections we describe these prop-
erties in detail and illustrate their practical implications. To better highlight
the properties and the implications, we make use of two example application
scenarios: automated vehicles 3 and AI-based hiring 4 . Both cases manifest
an urgent need for meaningful human control in non-forgiving scenarios that
strongly impact people’s lives (e.g., bodily harm, unfair decisions, discrimina-
tion), and their diﬀerences with respect to time constraints, embodiment, and
involved stakeholders juxtapose diﬀerent aspects of realizing these properties
in human-AI systems.
3.1 Property 1. The human-AI system has an explicit
moral operational design domain (moral ODD) and
the AI agent adheres to the boundaries of this domain
As the human-AI system has to be “responsive to relevant human moral rea-
sons” (i.e., the tracking condition), we need to identify the relevant humans,
3Automated vehicle scenario: A conditionally automated vehicle that can perform operational
aspects of the driving task (e.g., lane keeping or adaptive cruise control) as well as tactical aspects:
detecting events and objects on the road and responding to them, and interacting with human
pedestrians and other vehicles. Under normal circumstances, the automated vehicle can com-
plete a whole trip without interventions from the human driver; the manufacturer emphasizes
these autonomous features in their marketing and promotional materials. The driver, however, is
required to constantly supervise the system. There is no requirement for the driver to keep their
hands on the steering wheel, but the driver must remain alert at all times and be able to take
over operational control at the request of the automation system. The vehicle does not actively
monitor the driver state, but in case a human intervention is required, it attracts the driver’s
attention through a visual alert message and a loud auditory signal. The automated driving system
used in the vehicle relies on machine learning-based object recognition and behavior prediction
components, which were trained on the data obtained during extensive testing on public roads.
4AI-based hiring scenario: Job candidates applying for a vacancy go through an automated
video interview where they record their answers to questions formulated ahead of time by the
employer. After the interview is completed, an AI agent applies machine learning methods to
quantify candidates’ suitability for the job by correlating their facial expressions, choice of words,
and voice tone to personal traits such as creativity, willingness to learn, and conscientiousness.
To tailor the AI agent towards the context-speciﬁc preferences of the employer, the machine
learning algorithms were trained on video interviews performed with current employees and their
respective annual performance evaluations. The employer sets a threshold for a passing score, and
based on the scores outputted by the AI agent, a list of candidates who pass to the next selection
round is automatically compiled. The candidates do not see the score they were assigned. Neither
the candidate, nor the employer, receive an explanation of how the scores were computed. The
employer considers the human-AI system to be a cost-eﬀective solution for what has previously
been a time-consuming ﬁrst-round selection process that required hiring additional screening staﬀ.
In addition, the employer seeks to increase diversity at the company and considers AI-based
selection to be less prone to discriminatory biases.
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
11
their relevant (moral) reasons, and the circumstances in which these reasons
are relevant. To this end, specifying the technical conditions in which the sys-
tem is designed to operate is not suﬃcient. Designers should consider a larger
design space, one that captures also the values and societal norms that must
be considered and respected during both design and operation.
Building on the concept of operational design domain (ODD) which orig-
inates in the automotive domain [46], we name this larger design space the
moral operational design domain (moral ODD). The concept of ODD is often
used in the context of automated driving and refers to a set of contextual
conditions under which a driving automation system is designed to function:
outside of it a human driver is responsible. Speciﬁc contextual properties of
the automotive ODD typically include factors like road structure, road users,
road obstacles and environmental conditions (material elements), as well as
human-vehicle interactions and expected vehicle interactions with pedestrians
(relational elements) [47]. In terms of legal responsibility, the ODD consti-
tutes a selection of operation scenarios that can be safely managed [48] by the
automation and in which undesired consequences are minimized [47]. As such,
we believe it is a valuable concept to extend beyond automated vehicles, but
for human-AI systems in general.
The current conceptualization of the ODD strongly focuses on the technical
aspects of operation and the goal to extend the context boundaries of the ODD.
However, consideration of the wider societal implications is lacking. Similar to
Burton et al. [49], we argue that the concept of ODD should also emphasize the
broader social and ethical implications. We propose this extended concept of
ODD so that functional considerations of where and when a human-AI system
can operate, are seconded and complemented to the deﬁnition of the domain
12
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
in which a system is ought or should not operate from a moral perspective
(Figure 2).
Fig. 2 Property 1: Moral ODD. The human-AI system should operate within the bound-
aries of what it can do (for both the human and the AI agent) and within the moral
boundaries of what it ought to do, i.e. the human-AI system should act according to the
relevant moral reasons of the relevant stakeholders.
A simple example of a hammer illustrates the diﬀerence between the “can”
(e.g., material and relational elements) and the “ought to” dimensions (e.g.,
moral elements). From a purely functional perspective, a hammer “can” be
used as a weapon against another person. However, the morally acceptable
use of a hammer is for hammering nails (ought to), not to injure other people
(should not). Common sense already tells us that the use of a hammer as a
weapon is in most cases morally unacceptable (can but should not). It is clear
that the responsibility for proper use lies with the user, not the manufacturer
(except in cases where the hammer clearly does not function properly, e.g., the
head suddenly comes loose from the handle and injures a person).
In a scenario involving complex human-AI systems, this is often much less
clear cut. In the automated vehicle case, the moral ODD could contain moral
reasons representing safety (e.g., avoid road accidents), eﬃciency (e.g., reduce
travel time), and personal freedom (e.g., enhance independence for seniors), to
name just a few. In the AI-based hiring context, moral reasons could include,
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
13
from the employer’s side, reducing discrimination or increasing the number of
applicants in the recruitment process, while for the applicants’ side autonomy
over self-representation could be considered very relevant. In both contexts,
however, there might be tensions among diﬀerent moral reasons and stake-
holders, requiring an inclusive speciﬁcation and careful communication of the
moral ODD.
3.1.1 Practical considerations
The speciﬁcation and clear communication of the moral ODD support relevant
humans (e.g., users, designers, developers) to be aware of the moral implica-
tions of the system’s actions and their responsibility for these actions, thereby
supporting the tracing condition of meaningful human control. Furthermore, if
the operation of the AI agent remains conﬁned within the boundaries of what
it “can do” and “ought to do”, the tracking condition of meaningful human
control is supported as well, as this makes the human-AI system more respon-
sive to human understanding of what is the morally appropriate domain and
mode of operation. Achieving these beneﬁts requires that: (1) the moral ODD
be explicitly deﬁned; (2) the AI agent embed concrete solutions to constrain
the actions of the human-AI system within the boundaries of the ODD.
To deﬁne the moral ODD, designers and developers need to engage with
fundamental questions of what are the elements composing the moral ODD
and how do the features of each element aﬀect the system’s behavior. The
process starts with an ontological modelling of the environment(s) in which
the human-AI system is expected to operate. Such complex assemblage of ele-
ments and relationships could be meaningfully represented within the moral
ODD by making use of principles from existing research on software appli-
cations where ontologies are developed to enable context-aware computing
14
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
systems [50, 51]. The mapping of material and relational elements character-
izing a domain should be complemented with an investigation of what might
be the morally relevant reasons, what they represent in the speciﬁc context,
assumptions and consequences related to the system operation. Such under-
standing of the moral landscape of an AI agent under development could be
built by means of extensive literature and case reviews [52–54], participatory
approaches such as interviews, interactive workshops, and value-oriented cod-
ing of qualitative responses [40], which can be supported by natural language
processing algorithms [55].
How to satisfy the second requirement (constraining the AI agent to the
boundaries of the moral ODD) varies according to the constituent elements
of the moral ODD. When constraining the material and relational aspects
of the system behavior, approaches developed in the automotive and aircraft
domains can be a useful reference, e.g., risk-based path planning strategies for
unmanned aircraft systems in populated areas [56] and geofencing [57]. Rela-
tional aspects can be addressed through envelope protection. In the aircraft
domain, ﬂight envelope protection systems prevent the pilot from making con-
trol commands that drive the aircraft outside its operational boundaries, a
concept that has also been adopted for unmanned aerial vehicles [58]. This
concept could be extended beyond the aircraft domain, and become a more
general design pattern for constraining the relational elements of the moral
ODD in the systems involving both embodied and non-embodied AI agents
[59].
Moral constraints are arguably the most challenging to enforce. One possi-
ble way of imposing them is to set probabilistic guarantees on system outcomes
[60]. However, these approaches might not hold in real-world applications. Due
to the non-quantiﬁable nature of morally relevant elements, as well as moral
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
15
disagreements among humans, the boundaries of the moral ODD will remain
blurred [49]. Hence, it is crucial that humans, not AI agents, are empowered
to be aware of their responsibilities in order to make conscious decisions if and
when the human-AI system should deviate from the boundaries deﬁned by the
moral ODD. The assessment of whether and how an AI agent is conﬁned to
the moral ODD is not a binary check, but rather a contextualized and deliber-
ated analysis of the interaction between the AI agent, human agents, and the
social, physical, ethical, and legal environment surrounding them. Humans,
to conclude, should have an understanding of such blurry boundaries of the
moral ODD and their responsibility to meaningfully control the AI agent in
this process. Importantly, this includes the possibility of deciding that the use
of an AI agent is not acceptable in certain contexts.
3.2 Property 2. Human and AI agents have appropriate
and mutually compatible representations of the
human-AI system and its context
For a human-AI system to perform its function, both humans and AI agents
within the system should have some form of representations of the involved
tasks, role distributions, desired outcomes, the environment, mutual capa-
bilities and limitations. Such representations are often referred to as mental
models; these models enable agents to describe, explain and predict the
behavior of the system and decide which actions to take [61–63].
Shared representations, i.e., representations that are mutually compatible
between human and AI agents within the system, allow the agents to have
appropriate understanding of each other, the task, and the environment [62],
which facilitates agents to cooperate, adapt to changes, and respond to relevant
human reasons. To ensure safe operation of the system, agents should also have
16
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
a shared representation of each other’s abilities and limitations. Speciﬁcally,
the AI agents should account for humans’ inherent physical and cognitive
limitations, while human agents should account for the AI agents’ limitations
to avoid issues such as overreliance [64]. Furthermore — crucial to achieve
meaningful human control — these shared representations should include the
human reasons identiﬁed in the moral ODD (Figure 3), which can change
over time and across contexts. Due to the dynamic nature of elements of the
shared representations, the human and AI agents should be able to update
their representations of the potentially changing reasons accordingly.
Fig. 3 Property 2: The human and AI agents have appropriate and mutually compatible
representations of the human-AI system and of each other’s abilities and boundaries.
Incompatibility between representations could result in the lack of respon-
siveness to human reasons, thereby leading to undesired outcomes with
signiﬁcant moral consequences. For example, inconsistent mental models
between a human driver and automated vehicle about “who has the control
authority”, in which the human driver believes that the automated vehicle has
control and vice versa, could result in a critical and unsafe system state [65].
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
17
3.2.1 Practical considerations
In order for the agents’ shared representations to facilitate the system’s track-
ing of relevant human reasons, the system designers ﬁrst need to deﬁne which
aspects of the system and its context (including relevant humans, AI agents,
the environment, and the moral ODD) each agent should have a representa-
tion of. The process of determining what kinds of representations are needed
will be context-speciﬁc and depend on the moral ODD of the system. A use-
ful approach to determine the necessary representations and to translate these
high-level concepts into practical design requirements is co-active design [61].
Speciﬁc to building and maintaining shared representations, this approach pro-
vides guidelines on how to establish observability and predictability between
the human and AI agents, including what needs to be communicated and when
[62].
Representations can include practical matters such as task allocation, role
distribution and system limits, but also understanding of how humans perceive
the AI agents, human acceptance of and trust in the human-AI system, humans
values and social norms. This should also include determining the appropriate
level of representation. For instance, for an automated vehicle to interact with
a pedestrian, the designers need to determine whether it suﬃces for the vehicle
to have a representation of just the location of a pedestrian on the road and
their movement trajectory, or also the height and age of that human, their goals
and intentions. In the context of AI-based hiring, a key aspect requiring shared
representation is the meaning of competence. In particular, the meanings of
soft skills, such as teamwork and creativity, are highly ﬂuid, context-dependent,
and contestable. Therefore, aligning the job-speciﬁc meaning of competence
among job seekers, employers, and any AI agent involved in the hiring process
is critical.
18
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
Once the representations required for each agent are deﬁned, the design and
engineering choices need to suﬃciently take these into account. Speciﬁcally,
such choices should facilitate (1) AI agents to build and maintain representa-
tions of the humans and their reasons, and (2) humans to form mental models
of AI agents and the overall human-AI system. These shared representations
can be achieved through various combinations of implicit (e.g., through inter-
action between agents) or explicit ways (e.g., by means of human training,
verbal communication). For example, to allow humans to build and maintain
a representation of an AI agent, it can be developed to be observable and pre-
dictable implicitly through its design (e.g., glass-box design [66]), allowing the
operator to better understand the AI agent’s decision-making. Ecological inter-
face design can also leverage knowledge on human information processing to
design human-AI interfaces that are optimally suited to convey complex data
in a comprehensible manner [67]. Maintaining accurate representations during
the human-AI system’s deployment can also occur through interaction, either
implicitly (e.g., through intent inference from observed behavior) or explic-
itly (e.g., explicit verbal or written messages). For example, an AI system can
probe through behavior whether the human is aware of it’s intentions before
committing to a decision [68].
For the AI agents to have appropriate representations of human agents,
the assumptions about human intentions and behavior adopted by AI agents
(either implicitly or explicitly) need to be validated. This can be aided by incor-
porating theoretically grounded and empirically validated models of humans
in the interaction-planning algorithms of AI agents [69, 70], or by augmenting
bottom-up, machine-learned representations with top-down symbolic represen-
tations [71, 72]. An alternative approach, value alignment [73], aims to mitigate
the problems that arise when autonomous systems operate with inappropriate
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
19
objectives. In particular, inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), which is often
used in value alignment, aims to infer the “reward function” of an agent from
observations of the agent’s behavior, also in cooperative partial-information
settings (cooperative IRL) [74]. Although IRL is likely not suﬃcient to infer
human preferences from observed behaviour since human planning systemati-
cally deviates from the assumed global rationality [75], such approaches could
still support agents to maintain aligned shared representations [76].
3.3 Property 3. The relevant humans and AI agents have
ability and authority to control the system so that
humans can act upon their responsibility
Relevant humans should not be considered just mere subjects to be blamed
in case something goes wrong, i.e., an ethical or legal scapegoat for situations
when the system goes outside the moral ODD. They should rather be in a
position to act upon their moral responsibility by inﬂuencing the AI system
throughout its operation, and to bring the system back to the moral ODD if
needed (Figure 4).
This is only possible when the distribution of roles and control authority
between humans and AI (“who is doing what and who is in charge of what”)
is consistent with their individual and combined abilities, including reasonable
mechanism for overruling the AI agent through intervening and correcting
behavior, setting new goals, or delegating sub-tasks.
Flemisch et al. [65] provide a thorough account on the importance of an
appropriate balance between an agent’s ability, authority, and responsibility in
human-machine systems: ability to control should not be smaller than control
authority, and control authority should not be smaller than responsibility.
We argue that this account applies to complex human-AI systems as well.
20
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
Fig. 4 Property 3: The relevant humans and AI agents have the ability and authority to
control the system so that humans can act upon their responsibility, e.g., if the human
recognizes that a given situation might bring the system outside the moral ODD, they can
intervene to avoid this.
The ability of a human or AI agent includes their skill and competence to
perceive the state of a system and the environment. This also includes a way
to acquire and analyze relevant information, to make a decision to act, and to
perform that action appropriately [77]. Ability also includes the resources at
their disposal, such as tools (an autonomous vehicle without a steering wheel
would severely hamper the human’s ability to control the vehicle’s direction;
job candidates’ ability to represent themselves would be heavily impaired by
the lack of a feedback mechanism) or time (an automated vehicle that would
wait until the very last second to alert the driver of a dangerous situation also
limits the driver’s ability to direct the vehicle to safety; an employer would
have no control and understanding of an AI-based hiring system if assessment
of candidates would be provided only after the selection process ﬁnishes).
The understanding of an (AI or human) agent’s ability is intrinsically
related to the socio-technical context in which the system is embedded. Hence,
it is important that tasks are distributed according to the agent’s ability in
the context, not only from a functional perspective but also accounting for
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
21
the values and norms intrinsic to the activity. Approaches such as the nature-
of-activities [78, 79], under the umbrella of Value Sensitive Design [40], can
support the understanding of which set of tasks should be (partially or totally)
delegated or shared with AI agents, and which should be left exclusively to
humans. Given the collaborative nature of many human-AI systems, team
design patterns can be used as an intuitive graphical language for describing
and communicating to the team the design choices that inﬂuence how humans
and AI agents collaborate [80, 81].
The second component of the account proposed in [65] is control authority,
i.e., the degree to which a human or AI agent is enabled to execute control.
Consistency between authority and ability requires that an agent’s authority
does not exceed their ability. And similarly, responsibility should not exceed
authority. Thus, an agent should be responsible only for tasks they have
authority to perform, and they should have authority only over tasks they are
able to perform. A key implication of this consistency is that control is exerted
by the agent that has suﬃcient ability and authority, and more responsibility is
carried by the agents that exert more control. While ability and authority are
attributes that both human and AI agents possess, we consider responsibility
as a human-only quality. Therefore, the ability and authority of a human-AI
system must be traced to responsibilities of relevant humans, e.g., engineers,
designers, operators, users, and managers.
In the automated vehicle case, the driver has authority to control the vehicle
by accelerating, breaking and steering, as well to take over control authority
at any time. In the case of AI-based hiring, employers’ authority includes
setting a threshold for a passing score and deciding who to hire. Simply giving
human agents ﬁnal authority by design, without ensuring proper ability, is
not suﬃcient to empower humans to act upon their moral responsibility. For
22
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
example, a driver may have ﬁnal authority over a fully autonomous car, but
the driver’s loss of situational awareness, or even skill degradation as a result
of systematic lack of engagement in the driving task, will limit the driver’s
ability to exert that control authority [41, 65, 82]. The same might happen for
a manager with ﬁnal authority over who to hire,
if they merely sign oﬀon the hiring recommendations of the AI agent,
without substantively engaging in the assessment process themselves.
3.3.1 Practical considerations
As authority should not be smaller than ability, it is important to build a base-
line understanding of the abilities of human and AI agents and evaluate their
consistency with the control authority provided by the system’s design. From
the human side, human factors literature [83] can support the identiﬁcation of
a realistic baseline on human ability by applying psychological and physiolog-
ical principles to understand challenges that are likely to arise in human-AI
interaction [82, 84]. From the AI side, a proper understanding of ability should
not only be task-oriented (e.g., measuring performance from data sets against
benchmark), but also behavior-oriented. Approaches to understand AI ability
in context include approaches inspired by human cognitive tests, informa-
tion theory [85], and ethology (related to animal behavior) [14]. Designing
for appropriate authority and ability also requires us to expand the scope of
design from human-AI interactions to social and organizational practices [11].
Human training, oversight procedures, administrative discretion, and policy
are just a few examples of organizational elements that signiﬁcantly determine
and shape agents’ authority and ability.
Design, training and technological development may “expand” or “shrink”
agents’ abilities through innovation, including training humans for new skills
and equipping AI agents with new technological capabilities, or achieving more
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
23
through interaction between humans and AI and their combined abilities. From
the AI side, especially for machine learning-based systems, as the relation
between the input data and the target variable changes over time, concept
drift methodologies can be applied to identify new situations which might
impact the AI agent’s ability to respond to new situations [86, 87]. From the
human side, interaction with technology might lead to behavioral adaptation
and unwanted situations e.g., speeding when driving with intelligent steering
assistance provided by an automated vehicle [88], decreasing human’s ability
to keep the system within the moral ODD. In such situations, the human-AI
system might move to a fallback state [89] or attract the driver’s attention
back to the supervision task thus restoring the driver’s ability to act upon
their ultimate responsibility for the vehicle’s operation.
Shared control is a promising approach to keep a balance between control
ability and authority, with relevant applications in the domain of automated
vehicles, robot-assisted surgery, brain-machine interfaces, and learning [90]. In
shared control, the human(s) and the AI agents(s) are interacting congruently
in a perception-action cycle to perform a dynamic task, i.e., control authority
is not attributed either to the human or to the AI agent, but is shared among
them [91]. Shared control could be particularly useful in human-AI systems
that need to act in complex situations that can rapidly change beyond the
envisioned moral ODD, and where rapid human adaptation and intervention
is needed.
24
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
3.4 Property 4. Actions of the AI agents are explicitly
linked to actions of humans who are aware of their
moral responsibility
Satisfying the ﬁrst three properties ensures that relevant humans are capa-
ble of acting upon their moral responsibility (property 3), are aware of the
moral implications of the system’s actions (property 1), and have shared rep-
resentations with AI agents (property 2). Yet, what is left undiscussed is the
requirement to ensure that the eﬀects of the system’s actions are traceable to
the relevant humans’ moral understanding.
To trace any consequence of the human-AI system’s operation to a proper
moral understanding of relevant humans, there should be explicit, explain-
able and inspectable link(s) between actions of the system and corresponding
human morally-loaded decisions and actions. We acknowledge that such link(s)
might be a more demanding form of tracing than what was originally proposed
in [11], nevertheless we deem it necessary to enable the tracing condition to be
inspectable. Furthermore, we argue that moral understanding of the system’s
eﬀects should be demonstrated by, at least, those humans who make decisions
with moral implications on the design, deployment, or use of the system, even
if the actions that bring a human decision to life are executed by the AI agent.
Hence, all relevant human decisions related to e.g., design, use, policy must be
explicitly logged and reported [66], in order to link actions of the AI agents
to relevant decisions, preferences, or actions of humans who are aware of the
system’s possible eﬀects in the world.
Even if all relevant humans made their decisions responsibly and with full
awareness of their possible moral implications, the lack of a readily identiﬁable
link from a given action of the AI agent to the underlying human decisions
would still result in loss of tracing. The links between actions of the systems
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
25
and corresponding human morally-loaded decisions and actions need to be
explicitly identiﬁable in two ways (Figure 5):
(1) Forward link: whenever a human within the human-AI system makes a
decision with moral implications (e.g., on the design, deployment, or use
of the system), that human should be aware of their moral responsibility
associated with that decision, even if the actions that bring this decision
to life are executed by the AI agent.
(2) Backward link: for any consequence of the actions of the human-AI sys-
tem, the human decisions and actions leading to that outcome should be
readily identiﬁable.
Fig. 5 Property 4: Actions of the AI agents are explicitly linked to actions of humans who
are aware of their moral responsibility. The forward link starts on the human and indicates
that whenever a human makes a decision with moral implications that aﬀects the system’s
behavior, that human should be aware of their moral responsibility. The backward link looks
at actions of the human-AI system and links it to previous human decisions (e.g., designers,
users).
3.4.1 Practical considerations
Enabling the forward link from human moral understanding to AI agents’
actions relates to the epistemic condition (also called knowledge condition) of
26
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
moral responsibility, which posits that humans should be aware of their respon-
sibility at the time of a decision [3, 92]. Hence, the human-AI system should
be designed in a way that simpliﬁes and aids achieving moral awareness. This
requires explicit links between design choices and stakeholder interpretations
of moral reasons that are at stake. Values hierarchies [93] provide a struc-
tured and transparent approach to map relations between design choices and
normative requirements. A value hierarchy visualizes the gradual speciﬁcation
of broad moral notions, such as moral responsibility, into context-dependent
properties or capabilities the system should exhibit, and further into concrete
socio-technical design requirements. Such a structured mapping can equip
stakeholders with the means to deliberate design choices in a manner that
explicitly links each choice to relevant aspects of moral responsibility. These
deliberations, as well as the accompanying rich body of empirical and con-
ceptual research must be well documented, inspectable, and legible. This kind
of transparency also supports the backward link between the system’s actions
and the design choices made by relevant humans.
Furthermore, requirements such as explainability of the system’s actions
can be essential in eﬀectively empowering human moral awareness. Since its
early works, the ﬁeld of explainable AI has increased its scope from explain-
ing complex models to technical experts towards placing the target audience
as a key aspect [94]. Given a certain human or group of humans as target
audience, we see explainability in the context of supporting the forward link
as clearly presenting the link between the system’s actions and human moral
awareness, as well as their alignment to the moral ODD. For example, consider
an automated vehicle which slows down and pulls oﬀthe road after it recog-
nizes a car accident [12]. Right after that the vehicle should then remind the
driver of their duty to provide assistance to possible victims in the accident. In
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
27
the context of AI-based hiring, explanations of assessment scores in language
that directly links observed job seeker performances to job-speciﬁc meanings
of competence can help employers, job seekers, designers, and developers bet-
ter outline the boundaries of moral ODD during design phase. For example,
this can help reveal whether there is misalignment between conceptions of
competence among the human agents and the AI algorithm.
In complex socio-technical environments the establishment of links between
human moral awareness and actions of a human-AI system is complicated
by the “problem of many hands”, which happens when more than one agent
contributes to a decision. It becomes less clear who is morally and legally
responsible for its consequences [95]. The “problem of many things” compli-
cates this further: there are not only many (human) hands, but also many
diﬀerent technologies interacting and inﬂuencing each others, be it multiple
AI agents or the interplay between sensors, processing units, and actuators
[96]. In case of unintended consequences of the AI agent’s actions, this com-
plexity can hinder the backward link, i.e., tracing the responsibility back to
individual human decisions. This challenge calls for systemic, socio-technical
design interventions that jointly consider social infrastructure (e.g., organiza-
tional processes, policy), physical infrastructure, and the AI agents that are
part of these infrastructures.
Recent developments using information theory to quantify human causal
responsibility [97] can provide relevant insight for the design and develop-
ment of appropriate forward and backward links, by providing a model with
which hypotheses can be tested. However, simplifying assumptions used in this
research need to be addressed to account for more realistic settings. Methods
from social sciences, e.g., Actor-Network Theory (ANT) [98] can support the
development of tracing networks of association amongst many actors, which
28
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
can help understand how, for example, humans may oﬄoad value-laden behav-
ior onto the technology around us. In the “sociology of a door closer”, [99]
describes how we made door closers the element in the assembly that mani-
fests politeness by ensuring the door closes softly and gradually, even as the
human actors may barge through without any action to regulate the door).
This sort of division of moral-labor should not be done mindlessly, it requires
human decisions to be analyzed and their relation to the moral ODD to be
carefully analyzed.
Although establishing explicit links between human decisions, human moral
awareness, and actions of the AI agents is challenging, they allow appropriate
post-hoc attribution of backward-looking responsibility for unintended conse-
quences, helping to avoid responsibility gaps and prevent similar events from
repeating in the future. It also facilitates forward-looking responsibility by
creating an incentive for the relevant humans to proactively reﬂect on the con-
sequences of their decisions (design choices, operational control, interactions,
etc.).
3.5 Summary of the four properties
We summarize the proposed properties of systems under meaningful human
control as follows:
• Property 1: The human-AI system has an explicit moral operational
design domain (moral ODD) and the AI agent adheres to the boundaries
of this domain.
• Property 2: Human and AI agents have appropriate and mutually
compatible representations of the human-AI system and its context.
• Property 3: The relevant agents have ability and authority to control the
system so that humans can act upon their responsibility.
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
29
• Property 4: Actions of the AI agents are explicitly linked to actions of
humans who are aware of their moral responsibility.
In our view, these properties are constructive as well as open: they can
serve as practical tools for supporting the design, development and evaluation
of human-AI systems, while being applicable to diverse types of systems (as
illustrated by the cases of automated vehicles and AI-based hiring).
Although the properties are not suﬃcient for a system to be under mean-
ingful human control, we deem them necessary from a design perspective: while
a system developed to possess all these properties may still not be fully under
meaningful human control, we believe that completely missing one of these
properties would imply that the human-AI system is not under meaningful
human control. Moreover, each property is non-binary and necessarily mul-
tidimensional. Consequently, improving the system to some extent according
to one or more of the four properties will lead to better tracking or tracing,
and therefore, more meaningful human control over that system. That said,
deﬁning “how much of each property is suﬃcient” in a given context would
generally require a thorough qualitative and situated analysis.
Furthermore, these four properties in themselves do not immediately trans-
late to concrete design guidelines; metrics, algorithms, and methodologies
needed to implement the properties are context- and system-speciﬁc. Yet, the
properties provide explicit anchors for connecting to existing frameworks and
methodologies across the design and engineering domains.
4 The broader picture
In addition to establishing explicit links between the concept of meaning-
ful human control and existing frameworks across the design and engineering
30
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
domains, the four proposed properties unveil a range of new methodologi-
cal questions and challenges on the path to practically implementing systems
under meaningful human control.
Designing for meaningful human control requires designing for emergence.
We argue that improving the human-AI system according to the properties we
presented will lead to better tracking and tracing, and therefore more meaning-
ful human control over that system. However, that does not provide an answer
to the critical question: how much meaningful human control is suﬃcient in a
given context? We believe these uncharted waters need to be explored through
practice-based research that aims to responsibly develop human-AI systems,
while ensuring inclusive and transparent collaborations among stakeholders
and safe and rigorous evaluation of concepts and designs. On the one hand,
it is reasonable to expect that socio-technical design requirements that act
for the sake of meaningful human control properties will vary across societal
and application domains. On the other hand, given a suﬃcient level of con-
ceptual abstraction, a common basic set of system properties that will prove
practically helpful and robust across diﬀerent societal domains can inform
both bottom-up practice and top-down regulation towards meaningful human
control. However, design and regulation cannot account for every detail of
a system’s processes, interactions, components in a deterministic, top-down
fashion. In fact, the socio-technical complexity of human-AI systems and the
inherent uncertainty of some aspects of their operation call for designing for
emergence [100], where the focus shifts to designing the social, physical, and
technical infrastructures that jointly provide favorable conditions for interac-
tions between agents to lead to emergence of desirable system properties and
behaviors.
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
31
Meaningful human control is necessary but not suﬃcient for ethical AI.
Meaningful human control over AI relates to the broader scope of AI ethics
in the sense that designing for meaningful human control means designing
for human moral responsibility. That is a critical aspect of ethical design of
human-AI systems, but by itself it is not suﬃcient to ensure other crucial
aspects of ethical design and operation, such as protection of human rights
and environmental sustainability. In fact, it is possible for a human-AI system
to be under meaningful human control with respect to some relevant humans,
yet result in outcomes that are considered morally unacceptable by society at
large [11]. Meaningful human control ensures that humans are aware of and
are equipped to act upon their responsibility, and that the human-AI system
is responsive to human moral reasons. But it does not prevent humans from
consciously designing and operating the human-AI system in an unethical way.
Therefore, meaningful human control must be part of a larger set of design
objectives that collectively align the human-AI system with societal values and
norms.
Transdisciplinary practices are vital to achieve meaningful human control
over AI. One of the most prominent challenges threaded throughout the four
properties may also be the most rewarding opportunity: the inherent need for
a socio-technical design process that crosses disciplinary boundaries. Each of
the four properties and meaningful human control as a whole is an endeavor
that is not solvable by a single discipline. It is a systemic, socio-technical puz-
zle in which computer scientists, designers, engineers, social scientists, legal
practitioners, and crucially, the societal stakeholders in question, each hold an
essential piece of the puzzle. Hence, the only way to “walk the walk” is to move
forward together, forming a transdisciplinary practice based on continuous
mutual learning [101] among both academic and non-academic stakeholders.
32
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
While this is undoubtedly a challenge, it may prove to be a rewarding oppor-
tunity for socially inclusive innovation that puts human moral responsibility
front and center.
5 Conclusion
In this article, we address the issue of responsibility gaps in design and use of
AI systems, and argue in favor of the concept of meaningful human control as
a principle to mitigate them. To the current discourse surrounding meaningful
human control, we contribute with a set of four actionable system properties
and related approaches useful for implementing them in practice. These prop-
erties unpack the tracking and tracing conditions of meaningful human control
[11] and provide a signiﬁcant step forward toward its operationalization. Even
though these properties may not be suﬃcient to completely ensure meaning-
ful human control for all possible situations, we deem them necessary, and as
such they help translate the tracking and tracing conditions into more tangi-
ble and designable requirements for human-AI systems. Our properties build
upon and expand existing conceptual frameworks and methodologies across
the design and engineering domains, such as the notion of operational design
domain [47], ontological modeling [51], co-active design [61], shared mental
models [62], shared control [90], value alignment [73], and consistency of ability,
control authority, and responsibility [65]. With these four properties we have
realized two goals: (1) contributed to closing the gap between the philosophi-
cal theory and practice of designing systems under meaningful human control,
and (2) explicitly link meaningful human control to existing frameworks and
methodologies across disciplines that can support design and development of
human-AI systems.
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
33
Societal impacts and the issue of responsibility gaps in the use of AI today
puts forward meaningful human control as one of the central concepts when
discussing trustworthy and responsible AI, and we think it should also take
central place on AI development. We believe this work will enable researchers
and practitioners to take actionable steps towards the design and development
of systems under meaningful human control, enabling many of the promised
beneﬁts of AI while maintaining human responsibility and control.
Competing interest
The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the
content of this article.
Acknowledgement
We thank Filippo Santoni de Sio for helpful comments on the earlier version
of this manuscript.
References
[1] Floridi, L., Cowls, J., King, T.C., Taddeo, M.: How to Design AI for
Social Good: Seven Essential Factors. Science and Engineering Ethics
26(3), 1771–1796 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-020-00213-5
[2] Stinson, C.: Algorithms are not neutral. AI and Ethics, 1–8 (2022)
[3] Coeckelbergh, M.: AI Ethics. The MIT press essential knowledge series.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (2020)
[4] Cruz, J.: Shared Moral Foundations of Embodied Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
In: Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
34
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
Society, pp. 139–146 (2019)
[5] Jobin, A., Ienca, M., Vayena, E.: The global landscape of AI ethics
guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence 1(9), 389–399 (2019). https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2
[6] Umbrello, S., De Bellis, A.F.: A value-sensitive design approach to intelli-
gent agents. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Safety and Security (2018) CRC Press
(. ed) Roman Yampolskiy (2018)
[7] Matthias, A.: The responsibility gap: Ascribing responsibility for the
actions of learning automata. Ethics and information technology 6(3),
175–183 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-004-3422-1
[8] Akata, Z., Balliet, D., de Rijke, M., Dignum, F., Dignum, V., Eiben,
G., Fokkens, A., Grossi, D., Hindriks, K., Hoos, H., Hung, H., Jonker,
C., Monz, C., Neerincx, M., Oliehoek, F., Prakken, H., Schlobach, S.,
Van der Gaag, L., van Harmelen, F., Van Hoof, H., Van Riemsdijk, B.,
van Wynsberghe, A., Verbrugge, R., Verheij, B., Vossen, P., Welling,
M.: A Research Agenda for Hybrid Intelligence: Augmenting Human
Intellect With Collaborative, Adaptive, Responsible, and Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Computer 53(8), 18–28 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1109/MC.2020.2996587
[9] Dignum, V., Baldoni, M., Baroglio, C., Caon, M., Chatila, R., Dennis,
L., G´enova, G., Haim, G., Kließ, M.S., Lopez-Sanchez, M., Micalizio, R.,
Pav´on, J., Slavkovik, M., Smakman, M., Van Steenbergen, M., Tedeschi,
S., Van der Toree, L., Villata, S., de Wildt, T.: Ethics by Design: Neces-
sity or Curse? In: Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on
AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 60–66. ACM, New Orleans LA USA (2018).
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
35
https://doi.org/10.1145/3278721.3278745
[10] Bradshaw, J.M., Hoﬀman, R.R., Woods, D.D., Johnson, M.: The seven
deadly myths of” autonomous systems”. IEEE Intelligent Systems 28(3),
54–61 (2013)
[11] Santoni de Sio, F., Van den Hoven, J.: Meaningful Human Control over
Autonomous Systems: A Philosophical Account. Frontiers in Robotics
and AI 5, 15 (2018). https://doi.org/10/gf597h
[12] Mecacci, G., Santoni de Sio, F.: Meaningful human control as reason-
responsiveness: the case of dual-mode vehicles. Ethics and Infor-
mation Technology 22(2), 103–115 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10676-019-09519-w
[13] Johnson, N., Zhao, G., Hunsader, E., Qi, H., Johnson, N., Meng, J., Tiv-
nan, B.: Abrupt rise of new machine ecology beyond human response
time. Scientiﬁc Reports 3(1), 2627 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep02627
[14] Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J., Bonnefon, J.-F.,
Breazeal, C., Crandall, J.W., Christakis, N.A., Couzin, I.D., Jackson,
M.O., Jennings, N.R., Kamar, E., Kloumann, I.M., Larochelle, H., Lazer,
D., McElreath, R., Mislove, A., Parkes, D.C., Pentland, A.S., Roberts,
M.E., Shariﬀ, A., Tenenbaum, J.B., Wellman, M.: Machine behaviour.
Nature 568(7753), 477–486 (2019). https://doi.org/10/gfzvhx
[15] European Parliamentary Research Service (EPRS): The ethics of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence: Issues and initiatives. Panel for the Future of Science
and Technology PE 634.452 (2020)
36
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
[16] Giaccardi, E., Redstr¨om, J.: Technology And More-Than-Human Design.
Design Issue 36(4) (2020)
[17] Chen, L., Wilson, C.: Observing algorithmic marketplaces in-the-wild.
ACM SIGecom Exchanges 15(2), 34–39 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3055589.3055594
[18] Taplin, J.: Move Fast and Break Things: How Facebook, Google, and
Amazon Have Cornered Culture and What It Means For all of us. Pan
Macmillan, New York (2017)
[19] Johnston, P., Harris, R.: The Boeing 737 MAX saga: lessons for software
organizations. Software Quality Professional 21(3), 4–12 (2019)
[20] Serter, B., Beul, C., Lang, M., Schmidt, W.: Foreseeable Misuse in
Automated Driving Vehicles-The Human Factor in Fatal Accidents
of Complex Automation. Technical Report 0148-7191, SAE Technical
Paper (2017)
[21] Korinek, A., Stiglitz, J.E.: Artiﬁcial intelligence and its implications for
income distribution and unemployment. Technical Report 0898-2937,
National Bureau of Economic Research (2017)
[22] Angwin, J., JeﬀLarson, Surya Mattu, Lauren Kirchner: Machine Bias
There’s software used across the country to predict future criminals. And
it’s biased against blacks. ProPublica (2016)
[23] Sweeney, L.: Discrimination in online ad delivery. Queue 11(3), 10–29
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1145/2460276.2460278
[24] Article 36: Key areas for debate on autonomous weapons systems:
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
37
Memorandum for delegates at the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW) Meeting of Experts on Lethal Autonomous Weapons
Systems (LAWS) (2014)
[25] Article 36: Killing by Machine: Key Issues for Understanding Meaningful
Human Control (2015)
[26] Horowitz, M.C., Scharre, P.: Meaningful Human Control in Weapon
Systems: A Primer. working paper, 15 (2015)
[27] Behymer, K.J., Flach, J.M.: From Autonomous Systems to Sociotech-
nical Systems: Designing Eﬀective Collaborations. She Ji: The Journal
of Design, Economics, and Innovation 2(2), 105–114 (2016). https://doi.
org/10/ggsqcq
[28] Santoni de Sio, F., Mecacci, G.: Four responsibility gaps with artiﬁcial
intelligence: Why they matter and how to address them. Philosophy &
Technology, 1–28 (2021)
[29] Cummings, M.: Lethal Autonomous Weapons: Meaningful Human Con-
trol or Meaningful Human Certiﬁcation? IEEE Technology and Soci-
ety Magazine 38(4), 20–26 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/MTS.2019.
2948438
[30] Ekelhof, M.: Moving Beyond Semantics on Autonomous Weapons: Mean-
ingful Human Control in Operation. Global Policy 10(3), 343–348
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12665
[31] Beckers, G., Sijs, J., Van Diggelen, J., van Dijk, R.J.E., Bouma, H.,
Lomme, M., Hommes, R., Hillerstrom, F., Van der Waa, J., Van Velsen,
A., Mannucci, T., Voogd, J., Van Staal, W., Veltman, K., Wessels,
38
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
P., Huizing, A.: Intelligent autonomous vehicles with an extendable
knowledge base and meaningful human control. In: Bouma, H., Stokes,
R.J., Yitzhaky, Y., Prabhu, R. (eds.) Counterterrorism, Crime Fighting,
Forensics, and Surveillance Technologies III, p. 11. SPIE, Strasbourg,
France (2019). https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2533740
[32] Calvert, S.C., Heikoop, D.D., Mecacci, G., Van Arem, B.: A human
centric framework for the analysis of automated driving systems based
on meaningful human control. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science,
1–29 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1080/1463922X.2019.1697390
[33] Calvert, S.C., Mecacci, G., Heikoop, D.D., de Sio, F.S.: Full platoon con-
trol in Truck Platooning: A Meaningful Human Control perspective. In:
2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems (ITSC), pp. 3320–3326. IEEE, Maui, HI (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1109/ITSC.2018.8570013
[34] Ficuciello, F., Tamburrini, G., Arezzo, A., Villani, L., Siciliano, B.:
Autonomy in surgical robots and its meaningful human control. Pala-
dyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics 10(1), 30–43 (2019). https://doi.
org/10/ggqkzn
[35] Umbrello, S.: Meaningful Human Control over Smart Home Systems: A
Value Sensitive Design Approach. Humana.Mente Journal of Philosoph-
ical Studies 12(37) (2020)
[36] Braun, M., Hummel, P., Beck, S., Dabrock, P.: Primer on an ethics of AI-
based decision support systems in the clinic. Journal of Medical Ethics,
2019–105860 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2019-105860
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
39
[37] Wagner, B.: Liable, but Not in Control? ensuring Meaningful Human
Agency in Automated Decision-Making Systems. Policy & Internet
11(1), 104–122 (2019). https://doi.org/10/gfv5sz
[38] Fischer, J.M., Ravizza, M.: Responsibility and Control: A Theory of
Moral Responsibility. Cambridge university press, ??? (1998)
[39] Van den Hoven, J.: Value Sensitive Design and Responsible Innovation.
In: Owen, R., Bessant, J., Heintz, M. (eds.) Responsible Innovation, pp.
75–83. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1002/9781118551424.ch4
[40] Friedman, B., Hendry, D.G.: Value Sensitive Design: Shaping Technology
with Moral Imagination. MIT Press, Cambridge (2019)
[41] Heikoop, D.D., Hagenzieker, M., Mecacci, G., Calvert, S., Santoni De Sio,
F., Van Arem, B.: Human behaviour with automated driving systems: a
quantitative framework for meaningful human control. Theoretical Issues
in Ergonomics Science 20(6), 711–730 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1080/
1463922X.2019.1574931
[42] Calvert, S.C., Mecacci, G.: A conceptual control system description of
Cooperative and Automated Driving in mixed urban traﬃc with Mean-
ingful Human Control for design and evaluation. IEEE Open Journal
of Intelligent Transportation Systems, 1–1 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1109/OJITS.2020.3021461
[43] Wallach, W., Allen, C., Smit, I.: Machine morality: bottom-up and
top-down approaches for modelling human moral faculties. In: Machine
Ethics and Robot Ethics, pp. 249–266. Routledge, ??? (2020)
40
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
[44] Timmermans, S., Tavory, I.: Theory construction in qualitative research:
From grounded theory to abductive analysis. Sociological theory 30(3),
167–186 (2012)
[45] Dorst, K.: The nature of design thinking. In: Design Thinking Research
Symposium (2010). DAB Documents
[46] SAE: Taxonomy and Deﬁnitions for Terms Related to Driving Automa-
tion Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles. Technical report, SAE
International (June 2018). https://doi.org/10.4271/J3016 201806
[47] Czarnecki, K.: Operational Design Domain for Automated Driving
Systems - Taxonomy of Basic Terms (2018). https://doi.org/10/ggr6kg
[48] Koopman, P., Fratrik, F.: How Many Operational Design Domains,
Objects, and Events?, 4 (2019)
[49] Burton, S., Habli, I., Lawton, T., McDermid, J., Morgan, P., Porter,
Z.: Mind the gaps: Assuring the safety of autonomous systems from an
engineering, ethical, and legal perspective. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 279,
103201 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2019.103201
[50] Bettini, C., Brdiczka, O., Henricksen, K., Indulska, J., Nicklas, D.,
Ranganathan, A., Riboni, D.: A survey of context modelling and reason-
ing techniques. Pervasive and mobile computing 6(2), 161–180 (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2009.06.002
[51] Cabrera, O., Franch, X., Marco, J.: 3LConOnt: a three-level ontol-
ogy for context modelling in context-aware computing. Software &
Systems Modeling 18(2), 1345–1378 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10270-017-0611-z
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
41
[52] Coeckelbergh,
M.:
Drones,
information
technology,
and
distance:
mapping the moral epistemology of remote ﬁghting. Ethics and
information technology 15(2), 87–98 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10676-013-9313-6
[53] Galliott, J.: Military Robots: Mapping the Moral Landscape. Ashgate
Publishing, Ltd., London (2015)
[54] Childress, J.F., Faden, R.R., Gaare, R.D., Gostin, L.O., Kahn, J., Bon-
nie, R.J., Kass, N.E., Mastroianni, A.C., Moreno, J.D., Nieburg, P.:
Public health ethics: mapping the terrain. The Journal of Law, Medicine
& Ethics 30(2), 170–178 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-720X.
2002.tb00384.x
[55] Liscio, E., Van der Meer, M., Siebert, L.C., Jonker, C.M., Mouter,
N., Murukannaiah, P.K.: Axies: Identifying and evaluating context-
speciﬁc values. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 799–808 (2021)
[56] Primatesta, S., Scanavino, M., Guglieri, G., Rizzo, A.: A Risk-based Path
Planning Strategy to Compute Optimum Risk Path for Unmanned Air-
craft Systems over Populated Areas. In: 2020 International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pp. 641–650. IEEE, Athens,
Greece (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICUAS48674.2020.9213982
[57] Maiouak, M., Taleb, T.: Dynamic Maps for Automated Driving and UAV
Geofencing. IEEE Wireless Communications 26(4), 54–59 (2019). https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2019.1800544
[58] Yavrucuk, I., Prasad, J.V.R., Unnikrishnan, S.: Envelope Protection for
42
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. Journal of Guidance, Control,
and Dynamics 32(1), 248–261 (2009). https://doi.org/10.2514/1.35265
[59] Robbins, S.: AI and the path to envelopment: knowledge as a
ﬁrst step towards the responsible regulation and use of AI-powered
machines. AI & SOCIETY 35(2), 391–400 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00146-019-00891-1
[60] Thomas, P.S., da Silva, B.C., Barto, A.G., Giguere, S., Brun, Y., Brun-
skill, E.: Preventing undesirable behavior of intelligent machines. Science
366(6468), 999–1004 (2019). https://doi.org/10/ggd3zx
[61] Johnson, M., Bradshaw, J.M., Feltovich, P.J., Jonker, C.M., Van Riems-
dijk, M.B., Sierhuis, M.: Coactive Design: Designing Support for Inter-
dependence in Joint Activity. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction 3(1),
43 (2014). https://doi.org/10.5898/JHRI.3.1.Johnson
[62] Jonker, C.M., Van Riemsdijk, M.B., Vermeulen, B.: Shared Mental
Models. In: De Vos, M., Fornara, N., Pitt, J.V., Vouros, G. (eds.) Coor-
dination, Organizations, Institutions, and Norms in Agent Systems VI,
pp. 132–151. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2011)
[63] Wilson, J.R., Rutherford, A.: Mental models: Theory and application in
human factors. Human Factors 31(6), 617–634 (1989). https://doi.org/
10/gf4xtf
[64] Lee, J.D., See, K.A.: Trust in Automation: Designing for Appropriate
Reliance. Human Factors, 31 (2004)
[65] Flemisch, F., Heesen, M., Hesse, T., Kelsch, J., Schieben, A., Beller, J.:
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
43
Towards a dynamic balance between humans and automation: author-
ity, ability, responsibility and control in shared and cooperative control
situations. Cognition, Technology & Work 14(1), 3–18 (2012). https:
//doi.org/10/c7xmbh
[66] Aler Tubella, A., Theodorou, A., Dignum, F., Dignum, V.: Gov-
ernance by Glass-Box: Implementing Transparent Moral Bounds for
AI Behaviour. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 5787–5793. International
Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization, Macao, China
(2019). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/802
[67] Vicente, K.J., Rasmussen, J.: Ecological interface design: theoretical
foundations. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
22(4), 589–606 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1109/21.156574
[68] Sadigh, D., Landolﬁ, N., Sastry, S.S., Seshia, S.A., Dragan, A.D.: Plan-
ning for cars that coordinate with people: leveraging eﬀects on human
actions for planning and active information gathering over human inter-
nal state. Autonomous Robots 42(7), 1405–1426 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10514-018-9746-1
[69] Sch¨urmann, T., Beckerle, P.: Personalizing Human-Agent Interaction
Through Cognitive Models. Frontiers in Psychology 11, 8 (2020). https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.561510
[70] Siebinga, O., Zgonnikov, A., Abbink, D.: Validating human driver
models for interaction-aware automated vehicle controllers: A human fac-
tors approach. arXiv:2109.13077 [cs] (2021) https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.
13077 [cs]
44
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
[71] Van Bekkum, M., de Boer, M., Van Harmelen, F., Meyer-Vitali, A., ten
Teije, A.: Modular Design Patterns for Hybrid Learning and Reason-
ing Systems: a taxonomy, patterns and use cases. arXiv:2102.11965 [cs]
(2021) https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.11965 [cs]
[72] Marcus, G.: The Next Decade in AI: Four Steps Towards Robust Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence. arXiv:2002.06177 [cs] (2020) https://arxiv.org/abs/
2002.06177 [cs]
[73] Gabriel, I.: Artiﬁcial intelligence, values, and alignment. Minds and
machines 30(3), 411–437 (2020)
[74] Hadﬁeld-Menell, D., Russell, S.J., Abbeel, P., Dragan, A.: Coopera-
tive Inverse Reinforcement Learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 29 (2016)
[75] Armstrong, S., Mindermann, S.: Occam's razor is insuﬃcient to infer
the preferences of irrational agents. In: Bengio, S., Wallach, H.,
Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Garnett, R. (eds.)
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 31. Curran
Associates, Inc., ??? (2018). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/
ﬁle/d89a66c7c80a29b1bdbab0f2a1a94af8-Paper.pdf
[76] Peysakhovich, A.: Reinforcement Learning and Inverse Reinforcement
Learning with System 1 and System 2. In: Proceedings of the 2019
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. AIES ’19, pp. 409–
415. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314259
[77] Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T.B., Wickens, C.D.: A model for types
and levels of human interaction with automation. IEEE Transactions on
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
45
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans 30(3),
286–297 (2000). https://doi.org/10/c6zf92
[78] Santoni de Sio, F., Robichaud, P., Vincent, N.A.: Who Should Enhance?
conceptual and Normative Dimensions of Cognitive Enhancement.
HUMANA.MENTE Journal of Philosophical Studies 7(26), 179–197
(2014)
[79] Santoni de Sio, F., Van Wynsberghe, A.: When Should We Use Care
Robots? the Nature-of-Activities Approach. Science and Engineering
Ethics 22(6), 1745–1760 (2016). https://doi.org/10/ggp7nt
[80] Van Diggelen, J., Johnson, M.: Team Design Patterns. In: Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction, pp.
118–126. ACM, Kyoto Japan (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3349537.
3351892
[81] Van der Waa, J., Van Diggelen, J., Cavalcante Siebert, L., Neerincx,
M., Jonker, C.: Allocation of Moral Decision-Making in Human-Agent
Teams: A Pattern Approach. In: Harris, D., Li, W.-C. (eds.) Engineering
Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics. Cognition and Design vol. 12187,
pp. 203–220. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2020). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49183-3 16
[82] Kyriakidis, M., de Winter, J.C.F., Stanton, N., Bellet, T., Van Arem,
B., Brookhuis, K., Martens, M.H., Bengler, K., Andersson, J., Merat,
N., Reed, N., Flament, M., Hagenzieker, M., Happee, R.: A human fac-
tors perspective on automated driving. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics
Science 20(3), 223–249 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1080/1463922X.2017.
1293187
46
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
[83] Salvendy, G. (ed.): Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics: Sal-
vendy/Handbook of Human Factors 4e. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, NJ, USA (2012). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118131350
[84] Sujan, M., Furniss, D., Grundy, K., Grundy, H., Nelson, D., Elliott, M.,
White, S., Habli, I., Reynolds, N.: Human factors challenges for the safe
use of artiﬁcial intelligence in patient care. BMJ Health & Care Informat-
ics 26(1), 100081 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjhci-2019-100081
[85] Hern´andez-Orallo, Jos´e: Evaluation in artiﬁcial intelligence: from task-
oriented to ability-oriented measurement. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review
48, 397–447 (2017)
[86] Gama, J., ˇZliobait˙e, I., Bifet, A., Pechenizkiy, M., Bouchachia, A.: A
survey on concept drift adaptation. ACM Computing Surveys 46(4),
1–37 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1145/2523813
[87] Lu, J., Liu, A., Dong, F., Gu, F., Gama, J., Zhang, G.: Learning under
Concept Drift: A Review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 1–1 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2018.2876857
[88] Melman, T., de Winter, J.C.F., Abbink, D.A.: Does haptic steering
guidance instigate speeding? a driving simulator study into causes and
remedies. Accident Analysis & Prevention 98, 372–387 (2017). https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2016.10.016
[89] Christian, G.: Partially automated driving as a fallback level of high
automation. In: 6. Tagung Fahrerassistenzsysteme, (2013)
[90] Abbink, D.A., Carlson, T., Mulder, M., de Winter, J.C.F., Amin-
ravan, F., Gibo, T.L., Boer, E.R.: A Topology of Shared Control
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
47
Systems—Finding Common Ground in Diversity. IEEE Transactions
on Human-Machine Systems 48(5), 509–525 (2018). https://doi.org/10/
gfbkmk
[91] Abbink, D.A., Mulder, M., Boer, E.R.: Haptic shared control: smoothly
shifting control authority? Cognition, Technology & Work 14(1), 19–28
(2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10111-011-0192-5
[92] Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics, 2nd ed edn. Hackett Pub. Co, Indianapo-
lis, Ind (1999)
[93] Van de Poel, I.: Translating Values into Design Requirements. In:
Michelfelder, D.P., McCarthy, N., Goldberg, D.E. (eds.) Philosophy and
Engineering: Reﬂections on Practice, Principles and Process, pp. 253–
266. Springer, ??? (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-7762-0
20
[94] Barredo Arrieta, A., D´ıaz-Rodr´ıguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A.,
Tabik, S., Barbado, A., Garcia, S., Gil-Lopez, S., Molina, D., Benjamins,
R., Chatila, R., Herrera, F.: Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI):
Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible
AI. Information Fusion 58, 82–115 (2020). https://doi.org/10/ggqs5w
[95] Van de Poel, I., Royakkers, L.: Ethics, Technology, and Engineering: An
Introduction. Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken (2011)
[96] Coeckelbergh, M.: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Responsibility Attribution, and
a Relational Justiﬁcation of Explainability. Science and Engineering
Ethics (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-019-00146-8
[97] Douer, N., Meyer, J.: The Responsibility Quantiﬁcation Model of Human
48
Meaningful human control: actionable properties for AI system development
Interaction With Automation. IEEE Transactions on Automation Sci-
ence and Engineering 17(2), 1044–1060 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TASE.2020.2965466
[98] Latour, B., et al.: Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-
network-theory. Oxford university press, Oxford (2005)
[99] Johnson, J.: Mixing humans and nonhumans together: The sociology of
a door-closer. Social problems 35(3), 298–310 (1988)
[100] Pendleton-Jullian, A.M., Brown, J.S.: Design Unbound: Designing for
Emergence in a White Water World. MIT Press, Cambridge (2018)
[101] Van der Bijl-Brouwer, M., Malcolm, B.: Systemic Design Principles in
Social Innovation: A Study of Expert Practices and Design Rationales.
She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation 6(3), 386–407
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sheji.2020.06.001
