An Efficient Data Warehouse for Crop Yield Prediction 
Vuong M. Ngo, Nhien-An Le-Khac, M-Tahar Kechadi 
School of Computer Science, College of Science, 
University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract. 
Nowadays, precision agriculture combined with modern information and communications 
technologies, is becoming more common in agricultural activities such as automated irrigation 
systems, precision planting, variable rate applications of nutrients and pesticides, and agricultural 
decision support systems. In the latter, crop management data analysis, based on machine 
learning and data mining, focuses mainly on how to efficiently forecast and improve crop yield. In 
recent years, raw and semi-processed agricultural data are usually collected using sensors, 
robots, satellites, weather stations, farm equipment, farmers and agribusinesses while the Internet 
of Things (IoT) should deliver the promise of wirelessly connecting objects and devices in the 
agricultural ecosystem. Agricultural data typically captures information about farming entities and 
operations. Every farming entity encapsulates an individual farming concept, such as field, crop, 
seed, soil, temperature, humidity, pest, and weed. Agricultural datasets are spatial, temporal, 
complex, heterogeneous, non-standardized, and very large. In particular, agricultural data is 
considered as Big Data in terms of volume, variety, velocity and veracity. 
Designing and developing a data warehouse for precision agriculture is a key foundation for 
establishing a crop intelligence platform, which will enable resource efficient agronomy decision 
making and recommendations. Some of the requirements for such an agricultural data warehouse 
are privacy, security, and real-time access among its stakeholders (e.g., farmers, farm equipment 
manufacturers, agribusinesses, co-operative societies, customers and possibly Government 
agencies). However, currently there are very few reports in the literature that focus on the design 
of efficient data warehouses with the view of enabling Agricultural Big Data analysis and data 
mining. In this paper, we propose a system architecture and a database schema for designing 
and implementing a continental level data warehouse. Besides, some major challenges and 
agriculture dimensions are also reviewed and analysed. 
Keywords. Data warehouse, constellation schema, crop yield prediction, precision agriculture. 
  
1. Introduction 
Annual world cereal production in 2017 is estimated to be 2.64 billion tonnes (FAO – 2017) and 
by 2050 will need an increase of 60% to meet global population growth, which is forecasted to 
reach a total of 9.8 billion (Alexandratos and Bruinsma – 2012, United Nations – 2017). Hence, 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 2 
to satisfy the massively increased demand for food, crop yields must be significantly increased 
by using new farming technologies or methods. In agriculture, the key questions that we want to 
answer were always there since the beginning, maybe with some different constraints. These 
questions include (1) what kind of crops are suitable to a given field? (2) How to improve the crop 
yields for a given season? (3) Where can we sell at the highest price? etc. Until recently, it was 
not easy to access suitable information in order to answer such questions. That is because, they 
require the combination of many specific areas of knowledge and information on agriculture, 
technology, market and customer behaviour. For instance, for the first question, one needs a deep 
understanding of different crops characteristics and information about soil and weather thus 
allowing one to associate crops to suitable types of soil, weather conditions and market needs. 
For the second question, one needs to know the right time to plant it; depending on the period of 
crop development, water delivery, pesticide spray, and fertiliser calibration. As for the final 
question, we usually need the crop price, the supply, and demand information within the last few 
years, etc. 
With technological advances in the area of information and communication technology (ICT), 
farmers can access and share valuable information and knowledge. They can also obtain 
knowledge on new research results about seeds, reduction in post-harvest losses, finding better 
ways to access markets and so on. Besides, they can participate intensively in policy dialogues 
and discussions. More importantly, they can use some online tools to gather prices from different 
sources and access forecasted price and possible market for crop outputs (World Bank Group 
2017). 
Risks and uncertainty are common in agriculture most of which are due to irregular weather (such 
as droughts and floods), market movements and pest outbreaks. Recent advances in ICT can 
drastically reduce the costs of collecting, processing and disseminating information to supply early 
warnings to farmers. For instance, sensor technologies are currently used to gather data from the 
fields to estimate, forecast, or monitor damage. Timely and early warnings are essential to limit 
large losses. Additionally, ICT can provide efficient instruments for managing and mitigating risks. 
In 2016, the production of cereals in the 28-member countries of the European Union (EU-28) 
was 301 million tons which represented about 11.6% of world-wide cereal production. EU-28 is 
ranked 3rd in the world after China and United States (Momagri report). There are about 10 million 
people working in agricultural section in the EU-28, which accounts for 4.4% of the total EU-28 
employment (Jortay-2017). In Strandell and Wolff (2016), the total agricultural area was about 
186.4 million hectares which occupies 42.5% of the EU-28’s total land area. This is higher than 
the average of the world total agricultural area which is 37.9%. For EU agricultural land, arable 
land (including cereal land), grassland (including pasture, meadow and rough grazing) and 
permanent crops (such as fruits, berries, nuts, citrus, olives and vineyards) account for 59.8%, 
34.2% and 6%, respectively. The five most important crops in Europe are wheat, grain maize, 
barley, oats and winter cereal. 
As reported in (Eurobarometer report - 2016), it was agreed that agriculture and rural areas were 
very important for the future, and that agriculture and rural development budgets should be 
increased. It was stated in the same report that precision agriculture (PA) is of vital importance to 
the future of agriculture in Europe. They found that PA can make a significant contribution to food 
security and safety. Besides, PA will develop new ways of farming and will have direct effect on 
the society (Schrijver - 2016). PA was adopted in 1997 and since then it has shown continual 
increases in adoption. 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 3 
In this research, we focus on the development of an agricultural data warehouse for building a 
precision agricultural system. Building such a data collection and storage system which is suitable 
for rapid analytics is one of the important steps within the agricultural data analysis process which 
will can be used subsequently for agronomic decision-making. The benefits here include 
improvement of crop yield, lower input of chemicals, better farm management, and marketing to 
meet the world’s future needs.  
Accordingly, we firstly review major challenges for developing efficient data warehouses for 
agronomic purposes and then present methods for designing and implementing a continental data 
warehouse. Some of the challenges include 1) multiple sources of data, which are heterogeneous 
with varying levels of details and quality, 2) the issue of high dimensionality and its impact on the 
design choices and storage models, 3) definition of efficient and optimized schemas in terms of 
both data access and storage space, 4) the issue of interoperability with standards in the field. 
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: in the next Section we review the related work in 
the above context and Section 3 covers the application of ICT to the agricultural domain. We then 
present our approach and describe the architecture, challenges and schema of the proposed data 
warehouse in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 gives some concluding remarks. 
2. Related Work 
Data mining being at the heart of data analytics can be used to design an analysis process for 
exploiting big agricultural datasets. Recently, many papers have been published that exploit 
machine learning algorithms on sensor data and build models to improve agriculture economics. 
In Pantazi, et al (2016), the authors used supervised learning models to predict crop yield. Their 
models are based on self-organizing-maps, namely, supervised Kohonen networks, counter-
propagation artificial networks and XY-fusion. They associated high resolution data on soil and 
crop with iso-frequency classes of wheat yield productivity. In Park, et al. (2016), three rule-based 
machine learning; namely random forest, boosted regression trees, and Cubist, were used to 
predict drought conditions. The proposed models identify the relative importance of drought 
factors which varies by region, time, and drought type. The drought factors were collected from 
Moderate Resolution Imaging (MRI) Spectroradiometer and Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission 
satellite sensors. In addition, Feng et al (2017) proposed two models that used Extreme Learning 
Machine and Generalized Regression Neural Network. The models estimated water 
evapotranspiration based on daily temperature data which were obtained from six meteorological 
stations. Moreover, satellite data were also used to estimate grassland biomass (Ali, et al – 2017). 
The authors used Multiple Linear Regression, Neural Networks, and Adaptive-Neuro Fuzzy 
Inference models to estimate a such factor. 
There are also papers that have proposed “smart agriculture frameworks”. Golubovic et al (2016) 
proposed a framework to aggregate data inputs and notify when some key events are likely to 
occur, such as difficult weather conditions and the spread of pests. In their framework, users could 
provide areas and events of interests by keywords. The systems could return related information 
published in social media sources like Twitter. Shekhar et al. (2017) presented general comments 
and advice to support smart agriculture infrastructure, which are shared data spaces and 
intelligent cyber-infrastructure. The authors also presented interdisciplinary research to envision 
and test the feasibility of the next generation infrastructure. From a Big Data point of view, 
Schnase et al. (2017) used modern infrastructures, such as Cloud Computing, Hadoop, 
MapReduce, and Cloudera, to build a big data management and analysis platform. The platform 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 4 
provides a high-performance analytics and scalable data management in climate research. 
Kamilaris et al (2018) proposed software platform which uses Big data analysis on environmental 
sensor data about land, water and biodiversity. These technologies were Apache Hive and 
Hadoop and were used for storing and analysing data, respectively. This platform can support 
farmers on decision-making and administrators in policy-planning, which help increase food 
production with lower environmental impact. 
The above papers did not discuss how to build a data warehouse for a precision agriculture. Two 
quite old papers – Schulze, et al. (2007) and Nilakanta, et al. (2008) – presented ways of building 
a data warehouse for agricultural data. In Schulze, et al. (2007), the authors extended Entity-
Relationship Model for modelling operational and analytical data which is called the multi-
dimensional Entity-Relationship Model. They introduced new representation elements and 
showed the extension of an analytical schema. Thought, as the schemas were based on entity-
relationship model they cannot deal with high-performance, which is the key feature of a data 
warehouse. In Nilakanta, et al. (2008), the authors presented a data warehouse architecture for 
smart agriculture. They used a star schema model and each fact table has an individual star 
schema that creates a data mart. All data marts are connected via some common dimension 
tables. However, the data warehouse concerns livestock farming, not for crop farming. In addition, 
the number of dimensions in the tables is very small; only 3-dimensions – namely, Species, 
Location, and Time. Moreover, a star schema is not enough to present complex agricultural 
information and it is difficult to create new data marts for data analytics. 
3. Applications of Precision Agriculture 
Precision agriculture (PA) or precision farming is a set of techniques created by combining 
information technology and agriculture science to increase crop yield. Precision agriculture can 
be defined as the matching of agronomic inputs and practices to localised conditions in field and 
the improvement of the accuracy of their application (Finch, Samuel and Lane - 2014). The 
farming management in PA uses information technology, satellite positioning, remote sensing and 
proximal data gathering as observations measuring and responding to inter and intra-field 
variability in crops (JRC - 2014). 
The first wave of PA’s mission was how to better understand soil, fertility, genetic and the use of 
satellite positioning systems. In fact, the development of sensor and Global Navigation Satellite 
System (GNSS) technologies improved significantly farming management tasks, such as 
cultivation, seeding, fertilization, herbicide application, and harvesting. These farm management 
systems can also assess the status of soils, record weather information, quantify the nutrient 
status of crops, etc. The newest wave of PA’s mission is to combine information technology and 
agricultural science to build a decision-support system driven by data collected from yield 
monitors and multifunction tractor displays. PA promises both high quantity and quality of its 
products with minimum of resource usage, such as water, energy, fertilisers, and pesticides 
(Schrijver – 2016). These promises will significantly reduce the cost, reduce environmental 
impact, and produce much better food products.  
In the World Bank Group paper (2017), many applications of ICT to Agriculture are described. 
Land markets and land reform activities were more effectively supported by land information 
infrastructure. The infrastructure can also integrate land administration services into the wider e-
government arena. The forest management systems involve more public participation for better 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 5 
protection and conservation. With the development of Internet of Thing technologies, farms are 
more connected to collect and analyse data in real-time. 
Moreover, Controlled Traffic Farming (CTF) is a PA technology used widely on arable land. CTF 
avoids unnecessary crop damage and soil compaction. Besides, the method also avoids repetitive 
agricultural vehicle passes on the field to reduce fuel use and improve timeliness of operations. 
The environmental benefits of using CTF are many; one can cite reduction in surfaced nutrient 
leaching and reduction in fertilisers and pesticides quantities. Another PA method which helps 
optimising the use of fertilisers is Variable Rate Application (VRA). VRA, based on its spatial and 
temporal components, allows the use of more precise amount of fertilisers in arable lands (JRC-
2014).  
In fruit farming, automatic systems based on machine vision can monitor food quality and safety, 
such as colour, size, shape, sugar content and other features. For example, determining the 
harvest time is very important for grape quality to avoid mixing different grapes’ types and 
maturity. Thus, precision irrigation systems are being used to save water while improve crop yield 
and quality. These can avoid regulated deficit irrigation, partial root drying and sustained deficit 
irrigation. In Cohen (2017), the Gavish system of Israel can control the irrigation either separately 
or together with liquid fertilisers. The system is efficient for saving water and fertilisers while 
maximising crop yield and cutting production costs. 
There are other maturing technologies which are finding application in agriculture. Drones can 
monitor crop health. Soil monitoring systems can assist in tracking and improving the quality of 
physical, chemical, and biological properties of soil. Smart greenhouses allow to plant crops with 
minimal human intervention by automated actions which maintain optimal conditions of 
temperature, humidity, luminosity and soil moisture (XLabs report-2017). 
Eventually, the use of Big Data approaches can provide precise information for more control of 
farming efficiency and waste. There are six popular areas: (1) Awareness: know people’s opinions 
by using sentiment analysis; (2) Understanding: learn why something is happening, for instance, 
why food prices have gone down or why water shortages have arisen; (3) Advice: provide targeted 
advice to specific farms; (4) Early warning: identify early problems, such as disease or pest 
outbreaks; (5) Forecasting: predict future trends, such as prices for specific crops in specific 
areas; (6) Financial services: provide credit and insurance to farmers who need them. 
4. Data Warehouse for Precision Agriculture 
4.1. Multiple Sources of Data and Challenges 
The input data for the PA data warehouse used here were primarily obtained from an agronomy 
company including data from its operational systems, research results and field trials. These 
datasets were collected from demonstration farms, tens of thousands of field trials and this data 
comes from several European countries. There is a total of 29 datasets. On average, each dataset 
contains 18 tables and is about 1.4 GB in size. Some important tables that are defined for the PA 
data warehouse are described in Section 4.4. 
The main objective of the research is to build a system to efficiently handle agricultural data and 
facilitate the deployment of practical data mining techniques (Le-Khac et al. 2010) on these 
datasets with the view to extract useful knowledge and support decision-making. The available 
datasets are of two types endogenous and exogenous datasets. The endogenous data was 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 6 
collected and provided directly by the company, while the exogenous data concerns the external 
sources, such as weather systems, farmers, PA consultants, government agencies, retail 
agronomists and seed companies. They can help with information about local weather, pest and 
disease outbreak tracking, crop monitoring, market accessing, food security, products, prices and 
knowledge. Since individuals could be asked to share these information, user privacy and data 
security become important issues for the system. All these datasets need to be aggregated before 
mining them. 
PA presents many challenges in building an efficient data warehouse because the data is very 
big and very diverse. This is part of Big Data challenge. The main features of Big Data were first 
described by Pettey and Goasduff (2011); volume, variety, velocity, and veracity. The amount of 
agriculture data is rapidly increasing and is intensively produced by different sources, such as trial 
results, weather data, operational systems, sensor information, satellite images, and so on. 
Agricultural data has many different forms and formats, such as structured and unstructured data, 
imagery, metrics, geo-spatial, text, multi-media, model and equation. The velocity feature is the 
measure of how fast the data is produced and collected, as sensing technologies and other mobile 
devices are becoming more efficient and cheaper. Therefore, cleaning, aggregating and 
harmonising datasets in real-time for requirements of analytic operations becomes one of the key 
challenges. Another difficult challenge is the veracity of agricultural datasets since it is very 
important to have high quality data before analysing it. Tendency of agronomic data is uncertain 
because the data is gathered from sensors and manual processes. The heterogeneous sources 
often show inconsistency, ambiguity, latency and errors in the data. Finally, the PA system can 
be used by different kinds of users at the same time, for instance by both farmers and 
agronomists. Every type of user needs to query different information sets thus requiring specific 
analytics. All of these issues and constraints make the design of large scale data warehouses 
very challenging. 
4.2. DW Architecture 
In general, a data warehouse (DW) is a federated repository for all the data that an enterprise can 
collect through different data sources. The data sources can be various enterprise's business 
systems or external inputs. Golfarelli and Rizzi (2009) and Inmon (2005) defined data warehouse 
as a collection of data that supports decision making processes. It is defined around key subjects 
and its data should be integrated, consistent, evolving over time and non-volatile. 
A typical data warehousing architecture which is illustrated Figure 1 has four separate and distinct 
modules: Raw Data (Data Sources), Extraction Transformation Loading (ETL), Integrated 
Information, and Data Mining (Kimbal and Ross – 2013). The Raw Data module is originally stored 
in operational databases systems or comes from external information systems. The raw data 
requires cleansing to ensure data quality before being used. The ETL module includes tools for 
extracting, transforming and loading the data into a data warehouse storage.  
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 7 
 
Figure 1. Data warehouse architecture 
The Integrated Information module which is a logically centralised repository, contains the data 
warehouse storage, its metadata, and its OLAP engine. The data warehouse storage is 
organised, stored and accessed using a suitable schema defined in the metadata. Often the 
enterprise data warehouse is generated from a set of data marts. A data mart is a subset of the 
data warehouse storage and is usually oriented to a particular business function or department. 
The data is usually extracted in a form of data cube before it is analysed in the data mining module. 
A data cube is a data structure that allows fast analysis of data according to the multiple 
dimensions that define a business problem. The data cubes are created by online analytical 
processing engine (OLAP). Details of OLAP and data warehouse schema will be described in 
Sections 4.3 and 4.4. Finally, Data Mining module contains a set of learning techniques for data 
analysis and knowledge extraction. The knowledge is represented in a form that it can be 
interpreted quickly and easily by the users. It is usually represented graphically or as rules. 
4.3. Quality Criteria 
The accuracy of data mining and data analysis techniques depend on the quality of DW. As 
mentioned in Adelman and Moss (2000) and Kimball and Ross (2013), a quality DW should meet 
the following important criteria: 
- 
Making information easily accessible. 
- 
Presenting information consistently. 
- 
Integrating data correctly and completely. 
- 
Adapting to change. 
- 
Presenting information in a timely way. 
- 
Being a secure bastion that protects the information assets. 
- 
Serving as the authoritative and trustworthy foundation for improved decision making. 
The analytical tools need to provide right information at the right time. 
- 
Achieving benefits, both tangible and intangible. 
- 
Being accepted by users using the DW. 
The above criteria must be formulated to become measurements. For example, with the last 
criterion, a user satisfaction survey should be used to find out how a given DW satisfies its user’s 
expectations.  
 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 8 
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) 
OLAP performs multidimensional analysis of data and provides the capability for complex 
calculations, trend analysis, and sophisticated data modelling with a short execution time. That 
provides the insight and understanding of data in multiple dimensions to enable end-users to 
make better decisions. The most popular OLAP operations on multidimensional data are roll-up 
(consolidation), drill down, slice and dice, and pivot (rotation). “Roll-up” performs data aggregation 
computed in many dimensions. “Drill down” is the inverse of roll-up operation allowing users to 
navigate from less detailed data to more detailed data. Slice and dice operations perform a 
selection on one or more dimension of the given cube, thus resulting in a sub-cube. Pivot rotates 
the data axes in view in order to provide an alternative presentation of the data. 
The OLAP systems are categorised into three types: (1) Relational OLAP (ROLAP) which uses 
relational or extended-relational database and does not require pre-computation; (2) 
Multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP) which uses array-based multidimensional storage engines for 
multidimensional views of data and often require pre-processing to create data cubes; (3) Hybrid 
OLAP (HOLAP) which is a combination of both ROLAP and MOLAP. It offers the higher scalability 
of ROLAP and the faster computation of MOLAP. 
 
Figure 2.  A part of our data warehouse schema for Precision Agriculture 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 9 
In our Big Data context, ROLAP is not suitable because of its performance; each ROLAP report 
is an SQL query in the relational database that requires a significant execution time. Besides, 
ROLAP with its SQL statements does not meet all the users' needs, especially when performing 
complex calculations. While, MOLAP is a more traditional form of OLAP engine for data 
warehouses because it overcomes the disadvantages of ROLAP and the data warehouse is often 
built on a multi-dimensional schema. However, MOLAP has a disadvantage in that all calculations 
need to be performed during the data cube construction. Apache Kylin1 is a distributed analytics 
engine that provides an extremely fast MOLAP engine at scale with more than 10 billion rows of 
data records. This open source engine implements some methods to ameliorate the above 
disadvantage. These methods are: (1) storing pre-calculated results to serve analysis queries; (2) 
generating each level’s cuboids with all possible combinations of dimensions; (3) calculating all 
metrics at different levels; and (4) leveraging distributed computing power. However, the current 
MOLAP technology of Kylin is not really efficient in querying a high cardinality dimension. In 
addition, the combination of real-time/near-real-time and historical results for decision-making is 
really necessary but MOLAP is only good to serve queries on historical data. Hence, with 
agricultural Big Data, HOLAP should be able to exploit in-memory technologies of ROLAP to 
process data in real time. 
4.4. High Dimensionality and Schema 
The DW uses schema to logically describe the entire datasets. The DW schema consists of some 
fact tables and their corresponding dimension tables and their dependencies. A dimension is a 
structure that categorises data attribute, such as facts and observations (Oracle 9i.2 - 2007). The 
dimensions have some key functions to provide filtering, grouping and labelling. The rows in every 
dimension table are uniquely identified by a single key field. A fact table consists of dimension 
keys and measurements or metrics of a particular business process. 
In the above schema of the collected datasets, the constellation schema, also known galaxy 
schema, contains many fact tables and dimension tables. We only present some particular fact 
and dimension tables in this paper. Figure 2 describes a part of constellation schema for PA which 
includes four fact tables and 19-dimension tables. The Fact tables are Trading, Operation, 
Treatment and Yield. The Trading fact table has four dimensions, namely Product, Order, Supplier 
and Purchaser. The Operation fact table has 10 dimensions, namely Product, Crop, Field, Farmer, 
Soil, Fertiliser, Plow, Drilling, Water_Utilization and Inspection. The Treatment fact table has 8 
dimensions, namely Planning, Disease, Product, Crop, Field, Framer, Maintenance and Pest. 
Finally, the Yield fact table has three dimensions: Crop, Field and Farmer. Every fact table has 
primary key being combination of primary key of its dimension tables. 
Table 1 describes some particular attributes of 19-dimension tables which are presented in Figure 
2 and some dimensions of the DW. Each dimension table has a primary key with the same name 
of the table. There are some dimension tables shared between fact tables. For example, Crop, 
Farmer and Field dimension tables are shared by Operation, Treatment and Yield fact tables. 
Some dimension tables are linked together, such as Field dimension and Soil dimension. 
 
                                               
 
1 http://kylin.apache.org/ 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 10 
Table 1. Descriptions of dimension tables 
No. 
Dimension 
tables 
Particular attributes 
Linking to 
Facts/Dimensions 
1 
Business 
business_id, business name, original name, address, contact 
phone, contact mobile, contact email 
Product dim. 
2 
Crop  
crop_id, name, code, variety name, variety description, standard 
moisture percentage, estimated yield 
Operation fact, Treatment fact, 
Yield fact 
3 
Disease  
disease_id, name, type, features on crop, description, measure 
Treatment fact 
4 
Drilling  
drilling_id, method, machine, description, date 
Operation fact 
5 
Farmer  
farmer_id, name, sex, birth year, address, field area, phone, 
email, experiences, skills 
Operation fact, Treatment fact, 
Yield fact, Field dim. 
6 
Field   
field_id, station_id, farmer_id, name, block, area, working area 
Operation fact, Treatment fact, 
Yield fact, Farmer dim., 
Weather_Staion dim. 
7 
Fertiliser  
fertilizer_id, fertiliser nutrient, product name, application area, 
quantity, stock date 
Operation fact 
8 
Inspection  
inspection_id, description, problem type, severity, date, growth 
stage 
Operation fact 
9 
Maintenance  maintenance_id, rate, description, date 
Treatment fact 
10 
Order  
order_id, order date, transaction date, value, comment, reference Trading fact 
11 
Pest  
pest_id, common name, scientific name, type,  
description, density, coverage 
Treatment fact 
12 
Planning  
planning_id, name, plan number, product name, product rate, 
date, water volume, notes 
Treatment fact 
13 
Plow  
plow_id, tillage method, plowing depth, machine, date 
Operation fact 
14 
Product  
product_id, product name, group name, type name, date of 
manufacture, business_id 
Trading fact, Operation fact, 
Treatment fact, Business dim. 
15 
Purchaser  
purchaser_id, name, address, contact person, contact phone, 
contact mobile, contact email 
Trading fact 
16 
Soil  
soild_id, field_id, mineral particles, organic matter, colour, PH 
value 
Operation fact, Field dim. 
17 
Supplier  
supplier_id, name, address, contact person, contact phone, 
contact mobile, contact email 
Trading fact 
18 
Water_ 
Utilization  
water_utili_id, amount, source, method, date 
Operation fact 
19 
Weather_ 
Station 
station_id, station name, station batch, measure date, air 
temperature, soil temperature 
Field dim. 
5. Conclusion 
In this paper, we described a data warehouse solution for crop farming. The data warehouse 
(DW) supports Big Data analytics and storage. The recent applications of precision agriculture 
systems and major challenges into building a successful precision agriculture data warehouse 
were reviewed and analysed. The DW architecture includes necessary modules to deal with large 
scale and efficient analytics. The presented schema herein was optimised for the datasets that 
were made available to us. Moreover, it is flexible and adaptable to other datasets. It has been 
designed in a constellation schema in order to facilitate quality criteria. Finally, descriptions and 
relationships of particular fact and dimension tables ware also modelled and included in the 
schema.  
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 11 
In future works, we will study and compare features of popular data warehouse software tools, 
such as Amazon Redshift, Google Mesa, Facebook Hive, MongoDB and Cassandra. We will 
select suitable technologies to implement the proposed data warehouse. The technologies 
selected will need to have some key characteristics, such as high performance, support for data 
science, high storage capacity, scalability and security. Next, we will conduct experiments on 
scalability of the proposed data warehouse on real-world datasets. We will also look at how to 
integrate this data warehouse with the high-performance knowledge map framework (Le-Khac et 
al., 2007). 
 
Acknowledgements. 
This research is part of the CONSUS research programme which is funded under the SFI 
Strategic Partnerships Programme (16/SPP/3296) and is co-funded by Origin Enterprises Plc. 
References 
Adelman, S., & Moss, L. (2000). Data warehouse project management (1st edition). Addison-Wesley Professional. 
Alexandratos, N. & Bruinsma, J. 2012. World agriculture towards 2030/2050. ESA Working Paper, FAO. 
Ali, I., et al. (2017). Modeling managed grassland biomass estimation by using multitemporal remote sensing data - a 
machine learning approach. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 
Vol. 10, No. 7, pp.  3254 - 3264. 
Cohen, E. 2017. Controlling irrigation and fertigation benefits the farmers. Articles, Israel Agriculture. 
http://www.israelagri.com/?CategoryID=167&ArticleID=621. Accessed 12 February 2018. 
Eurobarometer report (2016). Europeans, agriculture and the common agricultural policy. Special Eurobarometer 
440, The European Commission. 
FAO report (2017). FAO cereal supply and demand brief. World Food Situation, FAO. 
http://www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/csdb/en/. Accessed 28 February 2018. 
Feng, Y., et al. (2017). Modeling reference evapotranspiration using extreme learning machine and generalized 
regression neural network only with temperature data. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 136, pp. 71-
78. 
Finch, S., Samuel, A., & Lane, G. P. (2014). Lockhart and wiseman’s crop husbandry including grassland (9th 
edition). Woodhead Publishing. 
Golfarelli, M., & Rizzi, S. (2009). Data warehouse design: modern principles and methodologies. McGraw-Hill 
Education. 
Golubovic, N., Krintz, C. & Wolski, R. (2016). Extracting spatial Information from social media in support of 
agricultural management decisions. Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGSPATIAL 10th Workshop on Geographic 
Information Retrieval (GIR'16), pp .4:1-4:2. 
Inmon, W. H. (2005). Building the data warehouse. Wiley. 
Kamilaris, A. et al. (2018). Estimating the environmental impact of agriculture by means of geospatial and big data 
analysis: The case of Catalonia. In Otjacques B., et al, From science to society (pp. 39-48). Springer, Cham. 
Kimball, R., & Ross, M. (2013). The data warehouse toolkit: The definitive guide to dimensional modeling (3rd 
edition). Wiley. 
Jortay, M., et al. (2017). Agriculture, forestry and fishery statistics. Eurostat, European Union, Imprimerie Centrale 
(Luxembourg). 
JRC: Joint Research Centre (2014). Precision agriculture: an opportunity for EU-farmers - potential support with the 
CAP 2014-2020. EU Science Hub, European Commission. 
Le-Khac, N-A. et al. (2007), Distributed knowledge map for mining data on grid platforms. International Journal of 
Computer Science and Network Security, Vol. 7, No. 10, pp. 98-107. 
Le-Khac, N-A. et al. (2010), A data mining-based solution for detecting suspicious money laundering cases in an 
investment bank. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and 
Data Applications (DBKDA 2010), pp. 235-240. 
The Pre-Print Paper was accepted in ICPA-14th 
June 24 – June 27, 2018 - Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Page 12 
Momagri report. The world’s major political powers are major agricultural powers. 
http://www.momagri.org/UK/agriculture-s-key-figures/The-European-Union-is-the-world-s-2nd-largest-agricultural-
producer_1062.html#ANCRTOP. Accessed 28 February 2018. 
Nilakanta, S., Scheibe, K. and Rai, A. (2008). Dimensional issues in agricultural data warehouse designs. Computers 
and Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 60, No. 2, pp. 263-278. 
Oracle9i Doc Release 2 (2007). Oracle data warehousing guide. Oracle Corporation. 
https://docs.oracle.com/cd/B10501_01/server.920/a96520/dimensio.htm#11840. Accessed 22 February 2018. 
Pantazi, X. E. (2016). Wheat yield prediction using machine learning and advanced sensing techniques. Computers 
and Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 121, pp. 57-65. 
Park, S., et al. (2016). Drought assessment and monitoring through blending of multi-sensor indices using machine 
learning approaches for different climate regions. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, Vol. 216, pp. 157-169. 
Pettey, C., & Goasduff, L. (2011). Gartner says solving ‘Big Data’ challenge involves more than just managing 
volumes of data. https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/1731916. Accessed 28 February 2018. 
Schnase, J. et al. (2017). MERRA analytic services: Meeting the big data challenges of climate science through 
cloud-enabled climate analytics-as-a-service. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, Vol. 61, pp. 198-211. 
Schrijver, R., et al. (2016). Precision Agriculture and the Future of Farming in Europe. Report of STOA, Science 
Foresight Unit, Europe Parliamentary Research Service, European Union. 
Schulze, C., Spilke, J. and Lehnerb, W. (2007). Data modelling for precision dairy farming within the competitive field 
of operational and analytical tasks. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, Vol. 59, No. 1-2, pp. 39-55. 
Shekhar, S., et al. (2017). Intelligent infrastructure for smart agriculture: An integrated food, energy and water system. 
Computing Research Repository (CoRR-2017). 
Strandell, H., & Wolff, P. (2016). The EU in the world (2016 edition). Eurostat, European Union. 
United Nations (2017). World population projected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050, and 11.2 billion in 2100. News, 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations. 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/world-population-prospects-2017.html. Accessed 28 
February 2018. 
World Bank Group paper (2017). ICT in agriculture: connecting smallholders to knowledge, networks, and institutions 
(updated edition). World Bank Publications. 
XLabs report (2017). The connected farm - a smart agriculture market assessment. Insights & White Papers, X Labs, 
HUAWEI. 
