J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
                                             Crop yield estimation by using soil and environmental parameters   
295
J Agric. Res., 2021, Vol. 59(3):295-303
www.jar.com.pk
Agriculture Department
Government of Punjab
DEVELOPMENT OF CROP YIELD ESTIMATION MODEL 
USING SOIL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS
Nisar Ahmed 1, Hafiz Muhammad Shahzad Asif 2, Gulshan Saleem 3  and 
Muhammad Usman Younus * 4
AGRI. ENGINEERING
ABSTRACT
Current study was conducted in collaboration with Department of Computer Sciences and 
Engineering, University of Engineering and technology, Lahore, Pakistan during 2020.  As a 
result, the focus of this work was on the development of a pre-harvest crop yield forecasting 
model based on soil and environmental parameters. These parameters were recorded on a 
monthly basis at National Tea & High Value Crops Research Institute (NTHRI) for a period 
of ten years. The parameters recorded were minimum and maximum temperature, humidity, 
rainfall, soil pH level, pesticide use, and labor expertise. To construct the feature set for model 
training, exploratory feature analysis, outlier analysis, feature scaling, feature transformation 
and feature selection using the ReliefF algorithm were performed. Through 10-fold cross 
validation, six regression algorithms were used for training and model evaluation. An ensemble 
of neural networks were used to build the final model. The ensemble were built using a novel 
method that trains several base learners with architectural and training data diversity. These 
trained models were ranked using the ReliefF algorithm and sequentially added to the ensemble 
until the validation performance stops improving. On the basis of four performance metrics, the 
final model was compared to the four best performing models. The proposed model provided 
mean averave error (MAE), mean squared error (MSE) and root mean squared error (RMSE) 
of 0.0942, 0.0145, and 0.1204, respectively, and an R-squared of 0.9461. The performance 
parameters were the best among the candidate models and were sufficient to justify its use as 
a tea crop yield prediction model.
KEYWORDS: Yield  forecasting;  regression;  data  mining;  artificial  neural   network; 	
	
                       ensemble learning; Pakistan
1 Ph.D. Scholar, 2 Associate 
Professor, Department of 
Computer Science and 
Engineering, University of 
Engineering and Technology, 
Lahore, 3 Ph.D. Scholar, 
Department of Computer 
Science, COMSATS University 
Islamabad (Lahore Campus), 
Lahore, 4 Researcher, Ecole 
Doctorale Matheematiques, 
Informatique, Telecommunication 
de Toulouse, Paul Sabatier 
University, Toulouse, France
*Corresponding author’s email: 
usman1644@gmail.com
Article received on:
22/01/2021
Accepted for publication:
30/03/2021
INTRODUCTION
Farming has a major role in the growth of human 
civilization as it is the only way to support the increasing 
food demands. With the growth of human population 
and settlements, the farmland area decreased and 
the need of food supplies increased. Advancements 
in agricultural technologies proven helpful to cater for 
increased needs and reduced crop loss. Plant genetics, 
weed and pest control methodologies and fertilizers 
are employed to overcome the decreasing soil fertility 
and increase the yield. Weather and soil analysis has 
provided insight to the parameters affecting the growth 
and yield and therefore are helpful in identification 
of suitable crop for a particular weather and land 
type. Field monitoring is important as it is helpful in 
yield estimation and contributes towards economic 
development and food security of a nation. Remote 
sensing has proven to be effective in agricultural 
monitoring, yield forecasting and irrigation scheduling 
(Weiss et al., 2020; Ahmad et al., 2021). These 
techniques provide flood and other disaster warnings 
as well as crop growth monitoring and disease spread 
modeling. The crop production and yield prediction 
have direct influence on the economics and food 
management (Hayes and Decker, 1996; Kogan et al., 
2019)). Estimation of crop yield is of particular interest 
to various stakeholders: farmers, national government 
and international institutions to strengthen the food 
security. The crop yield is considered as indicator of 
productivity which is total harvested mass per unit 
area. Small farm holders typically focus on yield at farm 
scale, expecting to increase their financial returns. 
Whereas government, international organizations and 
commodity traders are focused to yield estimates at 
larger scales such as administrative units or national 
levels. Crop insurer focus towards both small scale 
and large-scale yield estimates in order to assess field 
loss at finer scale and aggregate the yield at regional 
Copyright: @ 2021 by authors
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
N. Ahmed et al.
296
or larger scale. These type of information are relevant 
to policy-makers to provide guidelines for market 
intervention, trade and assistance (Filippi et al., 2019; 
Kogan et al., 2019).
Advances in Information Technology (IT) has provided 
the way to agricultural management. Processing of 
remotely sensed multispectral data, calculation of 
different reflectance indices, crop cover identification, 
disease identification & spread modeling, weather 
monitoring and forecasting, decision support systems 
and yield estimation are some of the techniques 
which are based on IT (Weiss et al., 2020; Younus et 
al., 2016). Crop yield estimation is usually performed 
using various methods and data sources such as 
expert knowledge, field surveys, statistical modeling 
and crop growth simulation models (Weiss et al., 
2020). Identification of crop condition and its potential 
outcomes can provide useful insights which can be 
helpful to cater the yield loss (Dutta, 2006). Various 
crop growth monitoring and yield estimation models 
are developed by research community which are based 
on soil, weather and remotely sensed data (Matthews 
and Stephens, 1998; Matthews et al., 2002; Younus 
and Kim, 2019). Pre-harvest yield estimation therefore 
plays an important role in maintenance of national food 
security (Hayes and Decker, 1996).
Tea (Camellia sinensis) is a high value crop and among 
biggest commodity of Pakistan. Pakistan spends large 
revenue on import of tea and any development in its 
yield improvement may be beneficial for economy 
(Ahmed et al., 2021). We have started our work in 
collaboration with National Tea and High Value Crops 
Research Institute (NTHRI), Shinkiyari, Mansehra.  It 
is an evergreen shrub and its leaves are plucked to 
produce green tea, black tea or oolong tea (depends 
on processing). Its tree is cut to below two meters 
when cultivated for tea production. Depending on 
their chemical footprint, different leaf ages produce 
varying qualities of tea. Typically, small, fresh leaves 
are plucked for tea every one or two weeks. Tea was 
originated in Southeast Asia and is cultivated in warm-
wet summers and cold-dry winters. The tea plants 
require annual rainfall with the range of 1150 to 1400 but 
its distribution throughout the year is equally important. 
Humidity also has a good relationship with tea yield 
and the quality of produced tea. A relative humidity of 
above 90%and temperature range of 20-26°C is very 
helpful for high yield and good quality. Soil PH is a very 
good indicator of yield prediction as it is affected with 
land fertility, land humidity and plant growth because 
temperature, rainfall and humidity are directly related 
to this parameter. Temperature at the other had is a 
very critical parameter as the significantly low or high 
temperature may entirely stop the growth regardless of 
other parameters. In the case of Tea farms at Shinkiyari, 
temperature usually remains in favorable range and 
doesn’t cause catastrophic effect on the growth. 
Sunshine, fast wind and hail affects the growth as well 
but in the current data, we don’t have access to this 
information. In his classical review stated that the ideal 
growing weather for tea is warmer temperature with 
high humidity and sunshine in the day and adequate 
rainfall during night time (Laycock, 1964).
In this study, parametric analysis is performed to identify 
the important parameters and irrelevant or redundant 
parameters are eliminated. Feature Selection is 
performed using a hybrid approach which perform 
feature ranking with ReliefF algorithm and sequentially 
add these ranked features until model performance 
stops increasing. These selected and complete feature 
sets are used to train on different regression algorithms 
to set a baseline performance as the dataset under 
use is not previously evaluated by researchers. The 
final model is constructed by training proposed neural 
network ensemble on the processed feature set.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Current study was conducted in collaboration with 
Department of Computer Sciences and Engineering, 
University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore, 
Pakistan during 2020. The data used in the study was 
gathered from the farms in Shinkiyari, district Mansehra 
(latitude, 34°27’ E; longitude, 73°16’ N; altitude, 542m) 
which are operated by National Tea & High value crops 
Research Institute (NTHRI) of Pakistan. The data 
collected on monthly basis up to ten years, a total of 
120 samples. The data contains nine independent 
variables namely minimum and maximum temperature 
of the farm, humidity level, rainfall, pH value of soil, per 
labor cost, labor training level, pesticide use, month 
and yield. Labor cost were not used in model design as 
it had no direct effect on yield and its values increased 
with time. Labor training levels had only two different 
levels and had shown no correlation with the yield. 
Similarly, pesticide use was also excluded from model 
design as it only mention that pesticide was used and 
there was no mention of its amount or type. Minimum 
and maximum temperatures were extracted from daily 
temperature readings recorded in the farms and their 
maximum and minimum values within a month were 
recorded. Humidity was the level of humidity recorded 
within the farms on daily basis and their average value 
during a month was recorded. Rainfall was the total 
amount of rain during a month. The pH level was the 
average value of pH which is measured at a depth of 
0.3 m at various sites in the tea farm. Month refers to 
the categorical variable corresponding to each month 
of the year and it was found to have good correlation 
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
                                             Crop yield estimation by using soil and environmental parameters   
297
with the yield. Yield was recorded value of crop produce 
in kilograms for black tea.
Uncertainty in the recorded parameters arose due to 
spatial variability of weather and soil parameters i.e. 
soil pH and temperature are taken at some fixed points 
and their values was usually averaged for a month’s 
period. Average temperature was calculated for each 
month from minimum and maximum temperature value 
as it better represent the yield and incorporated as 
another variable.
However, Table 1 provided the values of Pearson’s 
correlation 
coefficient 
test 
between 
different 
parameters. 
These 
tests 
measured 
the 
linear 
relationship of a variable with others. It was notable 
that average, maximum and minimum temperatures 
had very high correlation with each other. The reason 
for this relation was that three of these temperature 
values varied in a linear relationship to each other’s. 
Some variables had negative linear relationship with 
each other and indicate that increase in one, might 
result in decrease in the other variable such as rainfall 
will result in decreased pH level.
Furthermore, Table 2 provides the values of pearson 
correlation 
between 
the 
independent 
variables 
and yield. It can be noted that all the independent 
variables have positive correlation with yield except 
soil pH. Moreover, rainfall had the highest value of 
correlation coefficient with yield. It could be noted 
that pH value was negatively correlated with rainfall 
and have highest inter variable correlation. As a final 
feature set we have eight parameters (features) as 
an independent variables and one parameter, yield, 
as dependent parameter. Crop yield forecasting was 
done by fitting regression algorithm on the available 
data and testing on unseen samples. We had tried 
nine different regression algorithms on the available 
data and performed cross-validation to find the most 
suitable one for our scenario. Following are the steps 
followed to construct the crop yield forecasting model.
Outlier analysis
Outliers were the samples which had strong influence 
on the model’s performance. These points might be 
erroneous measurements and caused the model to 
behave improperly. Outlier analysis was performed to 
identify the influence points and check them for their 
validity. Identified outliers are sometimes removed or 
they were replaced through smoothing. We had used 
Cook’s distance to identify the influence points. We had 
selected those points with cook’s distance larger than 
0.5 to treat them as outliers and they were provided 
in Table 3. Sample ID indicate the index of the outlier 
sample, yield was the value of yield for the outlier 
and the last one was cook’s distance which was the 
basis of their selection. The performance of the model 
before and  after the removal of outliers was provided 
in results section.
Feature scaling
Feature scaling was a fundamental step for a lot of 
machine learning problems due to lot of reasons. It 
involved scaling the range of features to a specified 
range as different features were measured in different 
units and might had large variation in their range. The 
need of feature scaling arose as different ranges of 
features might caused the objective function to work 
improperly. It is especially important for distance based 
algorithms as when the features have different ranges, 
distance measure will be governed by the feature with 
large range. It was therefore, preferred to normalize the 
range of all the features so that each feature contribute 
almost proportionately towards distance measure. 
In gradient descent and stochastic gradient descent, 
the convergence speed is sometimes improved after 
application of feature normalization (Grus, 2015; Loffe 
and Szegedy, 2015). In support vector machines 
Table 1. Inter-parameter pearson correlation coefficient test
 Parameters
Average 
temperature
Maximum 
temperature
Minimum 
temperature
Humidity
Rainfall
pH scale
Average temperature
1.000
0.967
0.969
0.132
0.248
0.048
Maximum temperature
0.967
1.000
0.875
-0.010
0.119
0.147
Minimum temperature
0.969
0.875
1.000
0.261
0.358
-0.052
Humidity
0.132
-0.010
0.261
1.000
0.354
-0.241
Rainfall
0.248
0.119
0.358
0.354
1.000
-0.630
pH scale
0.048
0.147
-0.052
-0.241
-0.630
1.000
Table 2. Linear correlation between dependent variables and independent variable
Parameter
Average 
temperature
Maximum 
temperature
Minimum 
temperature
Rainfall
Humidity
Soil pH
Correlation with yield
0.35
0.22
0.47
0.87
0.38
-0.74
Table 3. Removed outliers: having large cook's distance
Tuple ID
Yield
Cook’s distance
84
115.8345
0.76
56
44.7655
0.58
60
71.6392
0.50
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
N. Ahmed et al.
298
(SVM), feature scaling can reduce the time to find 
support vectors and affect the results as well (Juszczak 
et al., 2002).There were different approaches to feature 
scaling such as min-max scaling, mean normalization, 
scaling to unit length and standardization. We had 
used standardization due to its advantages in neural 
networks, SVM, perceptron and radial basis function 
(Grus, 2015). The standardization is performed so that 
data has zero-mean and unit variance and is calculated 
with the below formula:
                                
Feature selection
There were numerous approaches to features selection 
with their advantages and limitations. We have opted 
a hybrid approach which use ReliefF (Robnik-Šikonja 
and Kononenko, 2003) and sequential feature selection 
(Aha and Bankert, 1996). ReliefF algorithm works by 
penalizing the features which gave different values 
to the neighbors of the same class and reward the 
features which give different values to the neighbors of 
the different classes. The algorithm provides the rank 
of each feature and weight associated to each one 
of them. Normally the features with positive weights 
were the ones which provide good prediction and the 
features with negative weights were the ones which 
negatively affect the prediction. Fig. 1 provides the 
ranked features on x-axes and their weight value on 
the y-axes.
It was noted from the plot that only three features 
had positive values and the rest of the features had 
negative values. We applied forward feature selection 
approach by sequentially adding each features in the 
ranked order and cross-validating it for reduction in 
root mean squared error (RMSE).
We selected linear SVM for cross-validation evaluation 
of features and selected five features. A RMSE value 
was achieved using linear SVM with five features as 
provided in Table 4.
Feature transformation
Feature transformation sometime helps in improvement 
of model performance. One purpose of using feature 
transformation is to compress the dynamic range of 
data which is useful in many algorithms. We have tried 
square root, reciprocal and log transformation on the 
data and checked the cross-validation performance. 
The log-transformation came out to be the winner of the 
three and have major effect on the distribution shape 
of the data. It is demonstrated to reduce the skewness 
and is appropriate for measured variables. It can’t be 
applied for zero or negative values.
Baseline performance
Design of any prediction system requires an algorithm 
which is trained and validated on the dataset. Selection 
of a suitable regression algorithm is therefore 
fundamental to efficient model construction. Moreover, 
the dataset under use was not used for yield forecasting 
in past and need a baseline performance. To establish 
a baseline performance, we trained seven different 
regression algorithms 10-fold Cross-Validation split. 
The six algorithms used for baseline performance 
assessment were multiple linear regression (MLR), 
Support Vector Machines Regression (SVR) with linear 
and quadratic kernels, Gaussian Process Regression 
(GPR), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), random 
forest (RF) and AdaBoost. The performance of these 
algorithms were computed on same CV split and 
performed on raw dataset and processed features for 
comparison.
Table 4. Root mean squared error (RMSE) of five regression models after each stage
Parameters
Raw dataset
Feature selection
Feature scaling
Outliers removal
Feature transformation
GPR
7.1456
6.6265
6.3128
5.9961
0.1542
Linear SVR
8.1314
7.9937
7.8867
7.778
0.2215
Quadratic SVR
7.4107
7.3067
7.1077
6.4612
0.1696
MLR
8.2140
7.9148
7.4444
7.4328
0.2151
ANN
7.1954
6.8541
6.2724
5.9614
0.1674
RF
7.1871
6.9821
6.4215
5.9712
0.1705
AdaBoost
7.4831
7.1421
6.8725
6.2143
0.2024
GPR = Gaussian process regression, MLR = Multiple linear regression, RMS = Root mean squared error, SUR = Support vector regression, 
ANN = Artifical neural network, RF = Random forest
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
                                             Crop yield estimation by using soil and environmental parameters   
299
Neural networks ensemble
The baseline results indicated that the GPR has 
minimum root mean squared euror (RMSE) RMSE 
after hyperparameter optimization. We on the other 
hand want to opt neural networks ensemble due to 
some of its interesting properties. Ensemble learning 
is a very appealing topic due to its incredible simplicity 
and complex underlying dynamics. Neural networks 
are good at learning complex relationships between 
independent and target variables but suffer from 
instability. Multiple training instances of a single neural 
networks will provide different validation accuracy due 
to different convergence point of neural networks. An 
averaging ensemble can be simply used to average the 
prediction of multiple trained neural networks which will 
provide stable results and having good generalization. 
However, we can do more to improve the performance 
of neural networks ensemble.
To train a neural network ensemble we constructed 
a shallow neural network architecture with only one 
hidden layer having five to thirty neurons in the hidden 
layer. The number of neurons in the hidden layer were 
randomly selected for each base learner. The training 
is performed by providing random subsampling of 
training data. It was to be noted that validation data 
was never used in any of the model construction 
phase, it was only used for validation after the end of 
ensemble learning process. The training process has 
trained 100 base learners with random subsampling 
and varying architectures to introduce diversity in the 
models. Moreover, the trained base learners were 
combined on the basis of model selection approach to 
form ensemble.
Model selection
It was better to combine few accurate base learners 
rather than combining all the base learners. Dietterich 
(2000). has demonstrated that the base learners used 
for ensemble construction should be diverse and 
relatively accurate to make it effective. However, it 
was unlikely for both requirements to be true as if they 
were accurate (Christensen, 2003). We initially trained 
100 base learners having architectural and training 
diversity and then few accurate one may added in the 
final ensemble. Wrapper based methods was to add 
models in the final ensemble by sequentially adding 
ensemble and cross-validating on a portion of dataset 
but we opted a hybrid approach for model selection. 
The base models was ranked using ReliefF algorithm 
which provided feature weights and their rank. Fig. 2 
showed a bar chart of ranked base learners with their 
weights. The negative weights were assigned to the 
predictors conversely affecting the output. We started 
sequentially adding base learners into the final model 
until there was no increase in the performance. Twenty-
four base learners are sequentially added into final 
model until there was increase in the performance and 
further addition of base learners provided no change in 
predictive performance.
Output calculation
The twenty-four base learners sequentially obtained 
in model selection process were used for output 
calculation. We had calculated the output function by 
initially assigning higher weight to the learners with 
low mean squared error 
. Weights were calculated 
for these predictors using a convex function to assign 
lower weight to a neural network with higher error and 
higher weight to a neural network with lower error. The 
weight 
 of 
 weak learner was calculated using 
formula as under:
                                   
The final output of predicted value was calculated by 
weighted average of 24 base learners which was given 
by the formula below:-
                         
The flow chart of the proposed ensemble learning 
process is provided in Fig. 3.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Data (Table 1) provided the values of independent 
variables and target variables. It was evident that 
rainfall demonstrates best linear relationship. pH also 
had somewhat linear relationship but temperature and 
humidity parameters had poor linear relation. pH was 
observed to be highly impactful variable in determining 
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
N. Ahmed et al.
300
the tea yield followed by rainfall, month of the year, 
temperature and humidity. Moreover, pH scale had the 
highest correlation with tea yield. It was indicated that 
pH scale had negative relationship with yield whereas 
the other parameters such as rainfall, average 
temperature, humidity had positive linear relationship 
based on calculated coefficients. It was proved to be 
difficult to map the data by using linear model but we 
adopted a modular approach and found the cross-
validation accuracy at each stage.
In first stage we discarded the features which had 
no relationship with the target variables based on 
empirical analysis such as labor cost, labor training, 
pesticide and year of harvest as some of them have 
consistent values. After that feature selection was 
performed by first ranking them with ReliefF algorithm 
and then applying sequential feature selection to add 
each ranked feature one by one to get the best feature 
set. The selected feature set contained five features. 
Table 4 provided the improvement in the results after 
feature selection stage.
The next stages were feature selection and outlier 
removal which provided subsequent reduction in 
RMSE. The last stage was feature transformation which 
provided significant reduction in RMSE. The RMSE 
value for ANN varies significantly after retraining and 
therefore five iterations at each stage were conducted 
and the average of these five iterations is recorded in 
the Table 4.
The results (Table 4) indicate the lowest RMSE value 
was provided by GPR with exponential kernel. The 
results of SVR with linear kernel and multiple linear 
regression were consistently low which was due to 
non-linear nature of the problem set. The three non-
linear methods provided lowest RMSE out of which 
GPR had a value 0.1542, quadratic SVR had a value of 
0.1696 and ANN had an average value of 0.1674. The 
three regression algorithms with lowest RMSE were 
evaluated to choose the final model.
The evaluation to select final model was performed 
by randomly splitting the data into 20% (28 samples) 
for testing and 80% (113 samples) for training. This 
splitting was performed so that each model gets the 
same data for training and testing. The SVR with 
quadratic kernel was tuned by optimizing its hyper-
parameters. Fig. 3 provides the minimum objective vs 
the number of function evaluations and the selected 
hyper-parameters for estimated objective function 
value of 0.093389 was provided in Table 5.
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
                                             Crop yield estimation by using soil and environmental parameters   
301
The GPR with squared exponential kernel is tuned 
by optimizing its hyper-parameters. Fig. 4 provided 
the minimum objective vs the number of function 
evaluations for GPR and the selected hyper-parameter 
value for sigma was 0.16517 at estimated objective 
function value of 0.034994. Figure 5 provides objective 
function model with 95% confidence interval.
The GPR with squared Exponential kernel is tuned 
by optimizing its hyper-parameters. Fig. 4 provided 
the minimum objective vs the number of function 
evaluations for GPR and the selected hyper-parameter 
value for sigma was 0.16517 at estimated objective 
function value of 0.034994. Fig. 5 provided the 
estimated and minimum objective for 30 iterations 
whereas Fig. 6 provided the objective function model 
with 95% confidence interval.
Table 6 provided the performance parameters for 
the three algorithms. The performance is compared 
based on four evaluation measures among which are 
MAE, MSE, RMSE and coefficient of determination 
R2. ANN gave best R2 but it was not stable and the 
values of MSE and R2 varied a lot with several iteration 
having same training and test data and different initial 
conditions. The variance in ANN model was reduced 
by using ensemble of neural networks. GPR and SVR 
on the other hand were stable as their performance 
only vary slightly with change in training and test data. 
The GPR provided best single learner performance 
whereas the ensembling of neural networks has 
beaten its performance and provided even higher 
performance. The proposed model provided highest 
value of coefficient of determination indicating that the 
proposed approach has best prediction performance 
in comparison to baseline approaches. The proposed 
approach provided a MAE of 0.0942, MSE of 0.0145, 
RMSE of 0.1204 and R-squared of 0.9461. Similar 
results were reported by Ahmad et al. (20121) and 
Ahmed et al. (2021).
The study highlight that neural networks ensemble 
have shown best generalization performance. ANN are 
known to model the complex relationships between 
independent and dependent variables and their 
variance can be easily managed by ensemble learning 
which provide stable models. It is also highlighted that 
selection of some good performing neural networks is 
Table 6. Performance parameters of three models
Paramerters
SVR
GPR
ANN
RF
Proposed
MAE
0.1763
0.1328
0.1795
0.1426
0.0942
MSE
0.0039
0.0034
0.0300
0.0353
0.0145
RMSE
0.0626
0.0581
0.1732
0.1705
0.1204
R2
0.8357
0.9078
0.9213
0.8942
0.9461
Box constraint
Kernel scale
Epsilon
5.375
8.5463
0.093389
Table 5. Optimized hyper-parameters for quadratic SVR
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
N. Ahmed et al.
302
better than adding all the base learners. The selected 
base learners can be added linearly, through weighted 
averaging or convex function approach. Moreover, 
the weights assigned to base learners using ReliefF 
algorithm were also used to calculate the final weighting 
function but weight assignment using proposed 
approach has provided best performance.
CONCLUSION
The present study demonstrated the use of different 
methods for crop yield forecasting of tea plant. Linear 
regression models were simplest regression approach 
as they had low variance but the parametric analysis 
indicated that predictor and response relationship was 
not linear and a non-linear approach would be more 
suitable for the problem. To solve the problem data pre-
processing methods were extensively explored and 
described 32. Five regression algorithms were applied 
to fit the model among which two were multiple linear 
regression and support vector machines regression 
with linear kernel were the two linear algorithms. 
Support vector machines regression with quadratic 
kernel, Gaussian process regression with exponential 
kernel and artificial neural network are the non-linear 
algorithms. RMSE with 10-fold cross-validation of 
linear algorithms was quite high so the non-linear 
algorithms were carried on for further analysis. Fine 
tuning of these algorithms was performed and their 
performance was measured on four evaluation metrics. 
ANN provided the highest values for MAE, MSE and 
RMSE indicating its poor performance but it provided 
best result for coefficient of determination (R2). On 
the other hand, GPR provided lowest values for MAE, 
MSE and RMSE and the value of R2 is slightly lower 
than ANN. Moreover, the value of ANN varies a lot with 
retraining of the model with same training and testing 
data showing instability so the proposed boosting 
method utilizing the ANN as weak learner provided 
relatively stable performance with MAE of 0.0942, 
MSE of 0.0145, RMSE of 0.1204 and R2 0.9461. The 
evaluation was performed using 30% hold-out data 
which was not used in training or validation and it 
indicate good generalization indicating that the model 
could be successfully deployed for yield forecasting of 
tea or other high value crops. 
REFERENCES
Aha, D.W. and R.L. Bankert. 1996. A comparative 
evaluation 
of 
sequential 
feature 
selection 
algorithms. Springer, Switzerland. p: 199-206.
Ahmad, N., H.M.S. Asif, G. Saleem, M.U. Younus, S. 
Anwar and M.R. Anjum. 2021.  Leaf Image-Based 
Plant Disease Identification Using Color and 
Texture Features. Wireless Pers Communication. 
Berlan, Germany.
Ahmed, N., H.M.S. Asif, G. Saleem and M.U. Younus. 
2021. Image quality assessment for foliar 
disease identification (AGROPATH).  J. Agric. 
Res, 59(2):177-186.
Christensen, S. W. 2003. Ensemble construction via 
designed output distortion. International Workshop 
on 
Multiple 
Classifier 
Systems, 
Springer. 
Switzerland. p: 1-20.
Dietterich, T.G. 2000. Ensemble methods in machine 
learning. International workshop on multiple 
classifier systems, Springer.
Dutta, R. 2006. Assessment of tea bush health and yield 
using geospatial techniques. GIS Development. 
1:22-25.
Filippi, P., E.J. Jones, N.S. Wimalathunge, P.D. 
Somarathna, L.E. Pozza, S.U. Ugbaje, T.G. 
Jephcott, S.E. Paterson, B.M. Whelan and T.F. 
Bishop. 2019. An approach to forecast grain crop 
yield using multi-layered, multi-farm data sets and 
machine learning. Precision Agriculture: 1-15.
Grus, J. 2015. Data science from scratch: first principles 
with python,  O’Reilly Media. 2:116-123.
Hayes, M. and W. Decker. 1996. Using NOAA AVHRR 
data  to  estimate  maize   production  in  the 
United States Corn  Belt.  Remote  Sensing 17(16): 
3189-3200.
Loffe, S. and C. Szegedy. 2015. Batch normalization: 
Accelerating 
deep 
network 
training 
by 
reducing internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1502.03167.
Juszczak, P., D. Tax and R.P. Duin. 2002. Feature 
scaling in support vector data description. Proc. 
ASCI, Citeseer, New Jersery, USA.
Kogan, F., W. Guo and W. Yang. 2019. Drought and food 
security prediction from NOAA new generation of 
operational satellites. Geomatics, Natural Hazards 
and Risk 10(1):651-666.
Laycock, D. 1964. An empirical correlation between 
weather and yearly tea yields in Malawi. Tropical 
Agriculture 41:277-291.
Matthews, R., W. Stephens, T. Hess, T. Middleton 
and A. Graves. 2002. Applications of crop/soil 
simulation models in tropical agricultural systems. 
2:140-151.
Matthews, R.B. and W. Stephens. 1998. CUPPA-
Tea: A simulation model describing seasonal 
yield variation and potential production of tea. 1. 
Shoot development and extension. Experimental 
Agriculture. 34(4):345-367.
Robnik-Šikonja, 
M. 
and 
I. 
Kononenko. 
2003. 
Theoretical and empirical analysis of ReliefF and 
RReliefF. Machine learning. 53:23-69.
J. Agric. Res. 2021, 59(3)
                                             Crop yield estimation by using soil and environmental parameters   
303
Weiss, M., F. Jacob and G. Duveiller. 2020. Remote 
sensing for agricultural applications: A meta-review. 
Remote Sensing of Environment. 236:111402.
Younus, M.U.,  M.A. Nadeem, W. Abbas, L. Yong  and 
R. Shafi. 2016. Design and implementation of 
wireless sensor networks integrated with RFID 
tags for navigation purpose”. 2nd International 
Conference on Computer and Communications, 
Germany.
Younus, M. and S.W. Kim. 2019. Proposition and real-
time implementation of an energy-aware routing 
protocol for a software defined wireless sensor 
network. Sensors. 19(12):2739-2744.
CONTRIBUTION OF AUTHORS
Sr. No.
Author’s name
Contribution
              Signature
1.
Nisar Ahmed
Conduct the research work and wrote the 
manuscript
2.
Hafiz Muhammad Shahzad Asif
Supervised the research work
3.
Gulshan Saleem
Helped in the research work
4.
Muhammad Usman Younus
Helped in the research work, prepared and 
proof read the manuscript
