Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images
using Multi-conditional Generative Adversarial Networks
Preprint, compiled December 7, 2023
Lukas Drees
ID 1∗, Dereje T. Demie
ID 2, Madhuri R. Paul
ID 3, Johannes Leonhardt
ID 1, Sabine J. Seidel
ID 2, Thomas F.
Döring
ID 3, and Ribana Roscher
ID 4,1
1Remote Sensing Group, Institute of Geodesy and Geoinformation, University of Bonn, Germany
2Crop Science Group, Institute of Crop Science and Resource Conservation, University of Bonn, Germany
3Agroecology and Organic Farming Group, Institute of Crop Science and Resource Conservation, University of Bonn, Germany
4Data Science For Crop Systems, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Germany
Abstract
Background: Image-based crop growth modeling can substantially contribute to precision agriculture by
revealing spatial crop development over time, which allows an early and location-specific estimation of relevant
future plant traits, such as leaf area or biomass. A prerequisite for realistic and sharp crop image generation is the
integration of multiple growth-influencing conditions in a model, such as an image of an initial growth stage, the
associated growth time, and further information about the field treatment. While image-based models provide
more flexibility for crop growth modeling than process-based models, there is still a significant research gap in
the comprehensive integration of various growth-influencing conditions. Further exploration and investigation
are needed to address this gap.
Methods: We present a two-stage framework consisting first of an image prediction model and second of a
growth estimation model, which both are independently trained. The image prediction model is a conditional
Wasserstein generative adversarial network (CWGAN). In the generator of this model, conditional batch
normalization (CBN) is used to integrate different conditions along with the input image. This allows the model
to generate time-varying artificial images dependent on multiple influencing factors of different kinds. These
images are used by the second part of the framework for plant phenotyping by deriving plant-specific traits and
comparing them with those of non-artificial (real) reference images. In addition, image quality is evaluated using
multi-scale structural similarity (MS-SSIM), learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS), and Fréchet
inception distance (FID). During inference, the framework allows image prediction for any combination of
conditions used in training; we call this prediction data-driven crop growth simulation.
Results: Experiments are performed on three datasets of different complexity. These datasets include the
laboratory plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) and crops grown under real field conditions, namely
cauliflower (GrowliFlower) and crop mixtures consisting of faba bean and spring wheat (MixedCrop). In all
cases, the framework allows realistic, sharp image predictions with a slight loss of quality from short-term to
long-term predictions. For MixedCrop grown under varying treatments (different cultivars, sowing densities), the
results show that adding these conditions increases the prediction quality as measured by the estimated biomass.
Simulations of varying growth-influencing conditions performed with the trained framework provide valuable
insights into how such factors relate to crop appearances, which is particularly useful in complex, less explored
crop mixture systems. Further results show that adding process-based simulated biomass as a condition increases
the accuracy of the derived phenotypic traits from the predicted images. This demonstrates the potential of our
framework to serve as an interface between an image- and process-based crop growth model.
Conclusion: The image-based prediction of future plant appearances is adequately feasible by multi-conditional
CWGAN. The presented framework complements process-based models and overcomes limitations, such as the
reliance on assumptions and the low exact field-localization specificity, by realistic visualizations of the spatial
crop development that directly lead to a high explainability of the model prediction.
Keywords machine learning, image generation, conditional GAN, growth modeling, crop mixtures
1
Background
Growing agricultural crops sustainably , i.e., producing sufficient
output with high resource use efficiency and minimal negative
impacts on ecosystems, requires complex optimization of crop
management [1]. Decisions on the operations during the season
include the timing and amounts of fertilization, irrigation, pro-
tection against pests and pathogens, weeding, the application
1∗correspondence: ldrees@uni-bonn.de
of growth regulations, and other activities. The optimality of
most of these operations and their combinations depend on the
phenology of crops, i.e., the growth stages and size of the plants.
Complex and multiple interactions typically occur between dif-
ferent management factors, crop genotypes, and variable en-
vironmental factors, affecting crop performance differently at
different growth stages. Because of this complexity, identifying
optimized crop management is not trivial, and various ways have
been developed to tackle this problem and to understand crop
arXiv:2312.03443v1  [cs.CV]  6 Dec 2023
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
2
Trt A
t
Days after sowing
Biomass
Decode
Encode
Regress
Trt A
Trt B
Simulation
Input
Growth
estimation
model
Image
prediction
model
t
Trt A
Trt B
Figure 1: Proposed two-step crop growth simulation framework: In the first step of image prediction, an input image is initially
encoded with its associated time (t) and treatment (trt). Then, this encoded representation can be decoded into newly generated
images with varying growth stages for different simulation times and treatments. In the second step of growth estimation, target
parameters such as projected leaf area or biomass are estimated from the images and analyzed over time. Both models are trained
independently.
responses to complex management × environment interactions.
Two complementary approaches are experimental field trials and
process-based (mechanistic) crop growth monitoring. While
field experimentation integrates actual environmental and man-
agement conditions, it is limited in time and space and can only
test a low number of such conditions. Crop growth modeling, on
the other hand, while allowing the simulation of multiple condi-
tions, including future environments, is always a simplification
of the situation in the field and may be limited in predicting
realistic responses of crops, especially under a changing climate
[2]. Because of the central role of crop phenology in agronomic
decision-making, it is useful to be able to predict future crop
growth stages and crop appearance in the season. One pathway
towards this goal is the automatic generation of crop images
derived from images taken during earlier stages. This is particu-
larly difficult but also useful in crop mixtures, where interactions
occur between two or more crop species grown together on the
same field.
As an example, cereal and legume crop mixtures are known to
improve resource use efficiency [3], enhance nutrient acquisition
[4], maximize system productivity through complementarity,
especially on low input land limited by nitrogen deficiency [5],
and reduce weeds, diseases, and insect pest infestations [6].
Nevertheless, many farmers do not consider crop mixtures as an
option, often due to a knowledge gap in species, cultivar, and
treatment selection, which results in performance uncertainty
[7]. One approach to overcome this uncertainty and to deal with
complexity is the use of predictive crop modeling.
The differences between predictive crop growth models are mani-
fold. Process-based models are based on biological and physical
relationships and aim to represent the mechanics of plant growth
and thus have a high interpretability.They are also suitable for
long-term predictions and can be generalized to different loca-
tions, but both require a complex calibration to the respective
environment. Image-based crop growth models, on the other
hand, are data-driven, with information on the actual crop envi-
ronment encoded in the image. By using machine learning to
process this image data, data-driven models can build complex
relationships [8] without relying on simplified assumptions, like
process-based models. This makes the modeling process less
interpretable, but the result that comprises a predicted image,
showing a realistic future spatial plant development, and derived
phenotypic traits can be explained in a better way as it is human-
understandable. The predicted image is highly versatile, which
is particularly interesting for crop mixtures, e.g., to count the
future number of crops at certain field positions or to visualize,
and thus better understand, how two species behave and com-
pete with respect to certain influencing factors. Therefore, this
work aims to extract more insight from image-based models
to complement missing facets of existing well-established crop
growth models.
In recent years, the most widely used method for image genera-
tion in plant science has been Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [9], as they have proven to generate high-quality im-
ages. In particular, its variant conditional GAN (CGAN) has
found a wide application, e.g., to generate realistic plant images
[10, 11, 12] for the purpose of data augmentation, or segmen-
tation [13]. While these works operate in the same temporal
domain, few works exist that incorporate the factor of time to
generate and analyze probable future growth stages. Yasrab et
al. [14] generate segmentation images of future root and shoot
systems of Arabidopsis (A. thaliana) and Komatsuna (Brassica
rapa) based on a time series of past images. However, their
GAN model is limited to observation times with fixed constant
intervals, which severely limits the space of possible input time
series and makes long-term predictions difficult. Furthermore,
due to significant differences in the bit depth, the generation of
segmentations is much less complex than the generation of arti-
ficial plant images, which can be considered as artificial sensor
data. Drees et al. [15] show long-term predictions of realistic
images of the above-ground plant phenotype, although it has the
disadvantage that time is not explicitly included as a condition
so that the image prediction is limited to predefined growth pre-
diction steps between fixed growth stages. This challenge can
be addressed by extending the generator with modules respon-
sible for integrating the time factor, such as a combination of
positional encoded time points and a transformer encoder, as
shown in [16]. This allows the flexible integration of multiple
time points as a condition, as well as the generation of an arbi-
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
3
trary growth stage in the output. However, the image quality is
not optimal because the model is limited to a small bottleneck
dimension due to a parameter-intensive Transformer encoder.
Further, the evaluation in this work is based only on classical
metrics, such as structural similarity, but lacks crucial plant-
specific evaluations that demonstrate actual usability by deriving
phenotypic traits. In general, all the aforementioned methods
have the disadvantage that plant growth is greatly simplified by
considering only other growth stages, so the time factor in the in-
put, while in fact, it is subject to complex mechanisms. Miranda
et al. [17] attempt to get closer to this complexity by integrat-
ing more conditions into the growth modeling, which allows
them to generate controlled and more explainable output images.
However, the method is limited to continuous conditions and to
a predefined growth prediction step from a fixed early growth
stage to a fixed later growth stage, which is unfavorable in agri-
cultural practice. In general, integrating multiple conditions is a
non-trivial task, as conditioned image generation tends to gener-
ate deterministic and less diverse outputs up to mode collapse
[18]. There are many different ways of integrating conditions
from concatenation [19] over auxiliary classifiers [20] and latent
projection [21] to conditional batch normalization [22, 23]. This
work uses the latter because it allows the intuitive integration of
multiple conditions while maintaining the stochasticity of the
model to create an adequate distribution of generated plants.
An overview of our growth simulation framework is depicted in
Fig. 1. It is a two-step procedure in which time-varying images
are first generated with the image prediction model and then an-
alyzed with an independently trained growth estimation model.
An important novelty in the image prediction model, which is a
Conditional Wasserstein GAN (CWGAN), is the integration of
multiple conditions of different types, that is, images (2D spatial
continuous variables), time points (discrete), treatment infor-
mation (categorical), and daily simulated biomass (continuous).
Since the biomass is process-based simulated, we demonstrate
that the image prediction model can serve as an interface that
makes the output of process-based crop growth models more
explainable by visualizing the spatial crop development. Con-
ditioning is realized by conditional batch normalization in both
parts, the encoder and decoder, of the CWGAN generator. This
enables simulations during inference, i.e., while fixing initial
conditions (input image, time, and treatment), for other growth
stages, conditions can be varied -as required- to generate multi-
ple realistic predictions, as shown in Fig. 1. Experiments have
been conducted on different datasets of varying complexity, from
the laboratory plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) to real
field data with cauliflower (GrowliFlower) and crop mixtures
(MixedCrop). In addition to classical GAN evaluation metrics,
we evaluate the quality of generated images through the growth
estimation model, which acts as a plant phenotyping module,
by comparing (depending on the dataset) either the projected
leaf area or the biomass estimated from generated and real im-
ages. For crop mixtures, this allows us to make a comparison
between our image-based crop growth simulation and a classic
process-based one, which was used to establish the growth esti-
mation model. A transferability experiment demonstrates that
our framework has the potential to be transferred to crop mix-
tures in another field with different environmental conditions.
(a) Arabidopsis
(b) Cauliflower
(d) Mixed-WG
(c) Mixed-CKA
Figure 2: Example evolution over time of one plant resp. from
each of the datasets (a) Arabidopsis, (b) GrowliFlower, (c)
Mixed-CKA, and (d) Mixed-WG visualized by georeferenced
clips from RGB orthophotos. The number above the images in-
dicates the growth stage for (a),(c), and (d) in days after sowing
[DAS] and for (b) in days after planting [DAP].
2
Materials and Methods
This section introduces the data basis (Sec. 2.1) and the frame-
work2, where a 2-step approach is followed. First, an image
is predicted (Sec. 2.2), and second, the growth is estimated
using plant phenotyping (Sec. 2.3). While existing state-of-the-
art models are used for growth estimation, which is fine-tuned
on our data, the methodological focus of this work is on the
first part, image prediction. We also provide details about the
process-based crop growth model (Sec. 2.3.3) used to evaluate
and analyze image-based predictions of crop mixtures.
For a clear distinction, we call a model output estimation if it
has the same time as the input and prediction if there is a time
shift ∆t = tgen −tin, so positive ∆t means prediction into the
future and negative ∆t means prediction into the past.
2.1
Data
Experiments are set up on three different datasets: Arabidopsis,
GrowliFlower, and MixedCrop, all containing RGB-image time
series/sequences of plants (Fig. 2). They meet the minimum
requirement of having aligned images, which means that all
images of a sequence show the exact same region from the same
perspective and resolution over time. Ideally, lightning condi-
tions are constant, which is only the case for the Arabidopsis
dataset. Beyond that, they differ in essential aspects such as over-
all size, type of plants, heterogeneity of images, and number,
as well as regularity of acquisition times during the vegetation
period. Notably, additional conditions on treatment and daily
simulated biomass are available only for MixedCrop, all listed
in Tab. 1.
Arabidopsis. The Arabidopsis dataset [24] includes 80 different
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants recorded on 4 trays of
20 plants each over a 35 d period using an IDS UI-5480SE cam-
era (Tamron 8 mm f1.4 lens, 5 MP). The camera was mounted on
2Source code is publicly available at https://github.com/
luked12/crop-growth-cgan
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
4
Arabidopsis
GrowliFlower
MixedCrop
Mixed-CKA
Mixed-WG
# images
54 384
102 264
21 371
18 800
observation period [d]
18
71
113
109
# times1 (Cond.: t)
850
12
11
10
# sequences2
64
8 522
2226
2212
# train sequences
40
6 572
1555
1580
# val sequences
8
979
311
316
# test sequences
16
971
311
316
∅images/sequence
850
12
9.60
8.50
image size [px]
256
256
256
256
GSD [mm]
0.23
3.10
5.67
5.67
diff. treatments (Cond.: trt)
×
×
✓(76)
✓(76)
sim. biomass (Cond.: bm)
×
×
✓
✓
GEM: # train images
512
1 541
15 017
13 154
GEM: # val images
148
326
3 177
2 823
GEM: # test images
148
330
3 177
2 823
Table 1: Dataset characteristics. The upper block indicates the image specifications for the image prediction model, where the
different conditions time (t), treatment (trt), and biomass (bm) are highlighted, and the bottom block displays the number of images
used to train, validate, and test the resp. growth estimation model (GEM), which is trained independently on individual images
without sequence information.
a robotic arm in a controlled laboratory environment, ensuring
image alignment. All tray images are corrected for barrel distor-
tions with a provided calibration script [24] and then manually
cropped at the edges of the pots, resulting in images that have a
single plant in the center region. We focus on images from 18
days of early developmental stages of Arabidopsis thaliana from
day 21 after sowing, which is shortly after plant emergence, to
day 38 after sowing. Any plants that were already removed from
the experiment before day 38 or that protruded beyond the edge
of the pot after day 38 were removed, leaving 64 plants. Please
note that the number of images per sequence clearly exceeds the
duration of the observation period in [d] because not only one
image per day was taken, but up to four per hour.
GrowliFlower.
Cauliflower image sequences from the
GrowliFlower dataset [25] contains a total of 102 264 images
of cauliflower (Brassica oleracea var. botrytis) in 2021 from
a field in Bornheim, Rhein-Sieg Kreis, Germany. We use the
images in a period of 71 days after planting and exclude images
after harvest. The images are orthophoto crops taken from a
drone equipped with a Sony Alpha 7R III camera (Zeiss/Batis
2.0 lens, 47.4 MP). The geo-referencing of the orthophotos al-
lows aligned plant-centered cropping at the same position at
each time point. However, compared to Arabidopsis, there is
not only one plant per image, but more heads are visible at the
image edges and overlap to later growth stages.
MixedCrop. The MixedCrop data are from a 2020 and 2021
PhenoRob crop mixture experiment described in detail by Paul
et al. [26]. Two different cultivars of faba bean (FB, Vicia
faba) and twelve different entries of spring wheat (SW, Triticum
aestivum) were sown in mixtures of a 1:1 ratio, which means
50 % of seeds of each species from the respective monoculture as
well as in monocultures. The field experiments were conducted
at two research sites of the University of Bonn in the Rhein-Sieg-
Kreis, Germany, namely, Campus Klein-Altendorf (CKA, near
Rheinbach) and at Wiesengut (WG, near Hennef). Coupled with
two different seeding densities i.e. low (L) 80% and high (H)
120% of the recommended sole crop densities (400 seeds m−2 for
SW and 45 seeds m−2 for FB), this results in (2·12+2+12)·2 = 76
different treatments, which were replicated four times, or, in case
of the faba bean monocultures, eight times, resulting in a total of
320 different plots of size 10 m × 1.5 m at each of the two sites.
Both experimental sites are located about 30 km apart and have
significantly different growing conditions because Mixed-CKA
is managed conventionally and Mixed-WG organically. The
dynamic process-based model used to generate the simulated
daily dried biomass values for SW and FB was calibrated and
tested against the observation data of the experiment carried out
at CKA 2020, 2021, and WG 2020. However, the images used
in this work are only from CKA 2020 and WG 2020.
The image acquisition was conducted 11 times for Mixed-CKA
and 10 times for Mixed-WG by UAV equipped with an FC6310
camera (1 ′′ CMOS 8.8 mm, 20 MP). The 320 field plots are
positional-aligned cropped from the geo-referenced orthophotos
before being horizontally rotated and plot-centered cropped into
seven non-overlapping and square image clippings. Due to or-
thophoto corruptions and destructive field measurements, some
sections were manually removed, resulting in a final number of
21 371 images for Mixed-CKA and 18 800 images for Mixed-
WG. For Mixed-WG, a significant spatial alignment error was
noticed by visual inspection, which is up to 10 cm, but incon-
sistent across the images and, therefore, difficult to filter out.
Since 10 cm corresponds approximately to the spatial extent of
a faba bean plant at 20 days after sowing (DAS), the offset is
well visible in the early images. For this reason, Mixed-WG is
not used for training; instead, it is intended to check the transfer-
ability, i.e., the model learned on Mixed-CKA and applied on
Mixed-WG.
In addition, a variety of other data were collected in this crop
mixture experiment, including weather, soil, and nutrient
parameters as well as height and biomass measurements
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
5
[26, 27] that are used in this work to calibrate and evaluate a
process-based crop growth model as described in Sec. 2.3.3.
The datasets vary in their complexity: The challenges of the
GrowliFlower and MixedCrop datasets are the considerable gaps
of different lengths between the recording times. In addition,
there are large spectral differences both within each time series
and between Mixed-CKA and Mixed-WG, mainly due to differ-
ent solar radiations, cloud coverings, and soil moistures during
the overflights. Compared to the other datasets, MixedCrop is
the most challenging due to its small size combined with a large
number of overlapping mixed crops, even at early growth stages.
All images are resized to a uniform size of 256 px × 256 px for
the experiments, resulting in different ground sample distances
(GSD) from 0.23 mm to 5.67 mm. For all experiments, the im-
age sequences are divided into the same spatially separated
training, validation, and test sets.
2.2
Image prediction
For image prediction, we build a multi-conditional Wasserstein
GAN with gradient penalty (CWGAN-GP) [28] from several
state-of-the-art components. The network consists of a generator
Gθ and a critic Dδ, where Gθ predicts images and Dδ estimates
a score for generated and real images. A special focus is on
the integration of multiple conditions of different types in the
architecture as described in Sec. 2.2.2.
2.2.1
Conditional Wasserstein GAN objective
In the generator, a target image Xgen = Gθ(Xin, y, z) is gen-
erated from an input image Xin, conditions y that split into
[yin, ygen], and noise z ∼N(0, 1). Both yin and ygen represent
multi-conditioning, which can be composed of several of the
following conditions: categorical (class) variables c, discrete
variables t, and continuous variables b. In the critic, either the
reference Dδ(Xref, Xin,y) or the generated image Dδ(Xgen, Xin,y)
are presented along with input image and conditions. The critic
estimates a score for both real and generated input, which is
capable of enforcing the minimization of the Wasserstein dis-
tance between the two distributions. The objective of adversarial
training is to optimize the parameters θ and δ by maximizing
the objective function LGAN(Gθ, Dδ) by Dδ and minimizing it
by Gθ.
θ∗, δ∗= arg min
θ arg max
δ
LGAN(Gθ, Dδ)
(1)
Eq. (2) represents LGAN(Gθ, Dδ) with the classic CWGAN ob-
jective in the first line [29], added with the gradient penalty term
in the second line to enforce the required 1-Lipschitz continuity
of Dδ [28].
LGAN(Gθ, Dδ) =E(z,Xin,y)[Dδ(Gθ(Xin, y, z), Xin, y)]
−E(Xref,Xin,y)[Dδ(Xref, Xin, y)]
+ λGPE(Xin, ˆX)[(∥∇ˆXDδ(Xin, ˆX)∥2 −1)2]
(2)
The gradient penalty is computed by blending a generated im-
age with a reference image, resulting in ˆX = ϵXref + (1 −
ϵ)Gθ(Xin, y, z), where ϵ is a random value in the range [0, 1],
and its impact is controlled by λGP. Using LGAN(Gθ, Dδ) mini-
mizes the Wasserstein-1 distance, sidestepping issues like mode
collapse and vanishing gradients in classic GAN training.
2.2.2
Network architecture with multi-conditioning
Generator. The generator consists of an encoder P that com-
presses the input image and conditions related to the input im-
age into a latent representation ξ = P(Xin, yin) and a decoder Q
that generates the target image from this latent representation,
the conditions for the image to be generated and a stochastic
component Xgen = Q(ξ, ygen, z). While for image encoding a
ResNet-18 backbone [30] without final fully connected layer
and global average pooling is used, decoding works architec-
turally inverse to that. To integrate the conditions, all batch
normalization layers are replaced by conditional batch normal-
ization layers (CBN) [31], where the learnable affine parameters
of classical batch normalization layers [32] are conditioned on
some auxiliary variable a. In our case, a are embeddings of the
conditions y using an embedding function Φ. In particular, the
encoder’s CBN layers are conditioned on the embeddings related
to the input image ain = Φ(yin), while the decoder’s CBN layers
are conditioned on the embeddings related to the image to be
generated agen = Φ(ygen). Specifically, the embedding function
is condition-type-specific since y can consist of conditions of
up to 3 different types, namely discrete temporal information t,
categorical class information c, and continuous variables b. So
individual embeddings are performed for each type of condition
in y, which are then concatenated to a.
yin = [tin, cin, bin]
ain = [Φt(tin), Φc(cin), Φb(bin)]
ygen = [tgen, cgen, bgen]
agen = [Φt(tgen), Φc(cgen), Φb(bgen)]
(3)
Here, the temporal embedding Φt consists of positional encod-
ing of discrete time points followed by a two-layer MLP with
a sigmoid linear unit (SiLU) function in between. The class
embedding Φc represents a classic lookup table embedding that
maps indices of categorical class variables to a continuous vector
representation. In order to embed a vector of continuous values
in Φb, a two-layer MLP with SiLU function in between is used.
In the experiments, the conditions c and b are not always used,
then embedding and resp. concatenating of unused conditions
is omitted. Notably, tin/tgen and cin/cgen are scalars represent-
ing in this work time (t) and treatment (c), respectively, while
bin/bgen are vectors, and in this work are 2-dimensional due to
SW and FB biomass. However, after embedding the individual
components of y, it is ensured that Φt(t), Φc(c), and Φa(b) all
represent continuous vectors of the same 64-dimensional embed-
ding size, which avoid prior weighting of different conditions.
Besides, CBN has already included a linear embedding for all
conditions, but the additional condition-type-specific embedding
has stabilized the training process.
To also incorporate stochasticity into the network, a random
128-dim noise vector z ∼N(0, 1) ∈Z is generated and via
noise mapping network f : Z 7→W inspired by StyleGAN [33]
projected to the latent code w ∈W, that matches the channel
dimension of the latent representation ξ. The mapping network
f is a shallow three-layer linear embedding network, which
gradually projects to 128-dimensional z to the 512-dimensional
w, which corresponds to the channel size of the ResNet-18 latent
representation. After repeating w for the spatial dimension
(global average pooling is omitted), it is finally added to ξ.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
6
Critic. The critic takes either the generated Xgen or reference
image Xref along with the input image Xin, and the conditions
y as input. The images are concatenated channel-wise in the
input and initially passed through a convolutional layer and
LeakyReLU activation.
This is followed by several convo-
lutional blocks consisting of a convolutional layer, instance
normalization, and LeakyReLU up to a spatial dimension of
[16 × 16]. Since batch normalization should be avoided in the
Wasserstein critic [28], the conditions are not integrated in this
case with CBN. Instead, each condition is first embedded to
dimension 256 with a different embedding function Ψ than Φ in
the generator, but the architecture of the embedding functions
inside Ψ and Φ are the same. Then, embedded conditions are
reshaped, and channel-wise concatenated to the intermediate
critic representation of spatial size [16 × 16]. Note that here, the
conditions of both the input image and the image to be gener-
ated are concatenated. From this concatenated representation,
the final score is generated with further convolutional blocks.
Previous experiments have shown that the training converges
significantly better with an intermediate fusion of the conditions
than with a fusion directly in the critic input.
2.2.3
Optimization and hyperparameter
The data sampling is special since, due to the temporal condition,
multiple reference images can be used for every input image.
Thus, in each epoch, we iterate over all training images, which
are then used as input images. For each input image, a random
image of the same plant is sampled, representing the reference
plant. The conditions yin and ygen are drawn according to the
sampled images. This causes that during the training cin=cgen
because the treatment class does not change over time. To
calculate test scores, the sampling procedure is identical, i.e.,
each test image represents an input image once and gets assigned
a random growth stage as the reference image to be generated.
For inference, the conditions can be varied arbitrarily, what we
call data-driven simulation. So a treatment change cin , cgen is
possible, b does not have to fit the reference values, and t can
deviate from the training range.
Adam optimizer is used with a learning rate of 1e-4 for both Gθ
and Dδ optimization. Regardless of the number of conditions,
the models are trained for 5000 epochs, after which the best
epoch is selected based on the lowest LPIPS on the validation
data. As image augmentations, horizontal and vertical flipping,
90◦rotations, slight translations within a random affine transfor-
mation, and ShadowOut, which is a semi-transparent version of
CutOut [34], are applied simultaneously to input and reference
or generated image. Using a single NVIDIA A100-PCIE-40GB
and a batch size of 64, the training duration is between 13 d and
35 d, depending on the dataset size.
2.2.4
Evaluation of image quality
To evaluate the quality of the generated images, we use a well-
established set of GAN evaluation metrics. For the direct com-
parison between generated and reference images of the same
time point, we use the Multi-scale Structural Similarity Index
Measure (MS-SSIM [35], optimal: 1) and the Learned Percep-
tual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS [36], optimal: 0). While MS-
SSIM compares the generated with the reference image directly
at different resolutions of the image space, LPIPS evaluates the
similarity of image patch activations in the VGG-embedded la-
tent space, which has been shown to have a high correlation with
human perception. In addition, the Fréchet Inception Distance
(FID [37], optimal: 0) is used to compare not only the quality
but also the diversity of the generated image distribution with
the real image distribution of the test dataset. However, for
long-term predictions far into the future or past, that means a
large difference exists in the growth stage of the input image
and the image to be generated, it is not expected that generated
and reference images match at the pixel level. Although FID
will degrade less as long as the plants fit into the distribution of
each growth stage, poor results are to be expected for MS-SSIM
and LPIPS in such cases. In order to evaluate whether useful
plant-related traits can still be derived, we use growth estimation
models, which determine leaf area (Sec. 2.3.1) and biomass
(Sec. 2.3.2) from the generated images.
2.3
Growth estimation
The part of growth estimation is realized, depending on the
dataset and plant type, either by instance segmentation to es-
timate projected leaf area or by image regression to estimate
biomass. Both can also be considered plant phenotyping based
on state-of-the-art neural networks.
2.3.1
Estimation of projected leaf area
For Arabidopsis and GrowliFlower, growth is determined us-
ing the plant trait projected leaf area (PLA). Both datasets are
well suited for this purpose because different plants do not over-
lap until advanced growth stages. The PLA is derived as an
image-wise pixel sum of plant segmentations predicted with a
Mask R-CNN instance segmentation model [38]. For this, two
models, with pre-trained ImageNet weights [39], are fine-tuned
on a few images of the respective plant dataset, for which ref-
erence segmentation masks are available. By multiplying the
PLA with the squared dataset-dependent ground sample dis-
tance (GSD), we report PLA in the unit mm2 for Arabidopsis
and cm2 for GrowliFlower, or for comparability normalized in
units of %/image, which is achieved by dividing the PLA by
the image size. In this work, PLA is not calculated for the
whole image but only out of the segmentation predictions for
the center plant, which is especially relevant for GrowliFlower,
where there are, in most cases, multiple plants per image. To
compare the PLA of a single generated and reference image
pair, we use ∆PLA = PLAgen −PLAref. For MixedCrop, PLA
cannot be extracted with sufficient accuracy at the pixel level
for the individual crop species due to the fine structure of the
wheat ears, enormous plant overlap, and a lack of annotated
images [40]. The accuracy evaluation of the trained instance
segmentation models can be found in Sec. 3.1.
2.3.2
Estimation of biomass
Instead of PLA, for MixedCrop, dried biomass (BM) in tons
per hectare [t/ha] is to be derived from the images as a growth
indicator, divided into the two mixture species spring wheat
(SW) and faba bean (FB). To estimate both with one model,
a ResNet-18 [30] is used, modifying the last linear layer to
two output neurons, which are activated with ReLU, since only
positive biomass values are possible. The mean squared error
(MSE) function is used as the loss function. We use weights from
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
7
a pre-training with ImageNet [39] and fine-tune on MixedCrop
images and corresponding reference biomass values. These
reference biomass values are not actual in-field measurements
but come from a process-based crop growth model for mixtures
(see Sec. 2.3.3) that provides simulated SW and FB biomasses
dynamically for each image time point. Notably, we use the
same simulated biomass values that are used as conditions in the
image prediction part of the framework. However, this dual use
is methodologically not critical since the image prediction part
and the growth estimation part are trained independently of each
other. Similar to PLA, we use ∆BM = BMgen −BMref to report
biomass deviations between two images. Overall, estimating
biomass from bird’s eye view imagery has three main challenges
and inherent sources of error. First, biomass is a 3D quantity
derived from 2D images. Second, the process-based crop growth
model only estimates dried biomass for all growth stages, which
is used as a reference for training the growth estimation model.
However, the images show plants with their actual humidity
(fresh matter), which changes over time. Third, the simulation
result varies only treatment-wise, but it is likely that plants of the
same treatment will develop differently in multiple replications
in the field due to different soil conditions. For the discussion
about the biomass estimation results and accuracies, see Sec. 3.2.
In the evaluation for a whole test set with N images, the mean
absolute error (MAE) and the mean error (ME) are calculated
as follows between plant traits (PT) of the generated and the
reference image, whereby either PLA or BM serve as PT.
MAE =
PN
i=1|PTgen
i
−PTref
i |
N
(4)
ME =
PN
i=1 PTgen
i
−PTref
i
N
(5)
Here, the quantity measure ME indicates whether the PT is
overall underestimated (ME negative) or overestimated (ME
positive). For whole agricultural fields, the mean error (ME) is
informative, in case it is not as important to accurately determine
the yield of individual field regions but rather to evaluate whether
the overall mean predictive error for the entire field is low.
2.3.3
Process-based modeling of crop mixtures
The process-based crop growth simulations were conducted
in the modeling platform SIMPLACE (Scientific Impact As-
sessment and Modeling Platform for Advanced Crop Ecosys-
tem Management) [41]. Different SimComponents (submodels)
in the SIMPLACE framework were combined, namely LIN-
TULPhenology, LINTUL5NPKDemand, SlimNitrogen, LIN-
TUL5Biomass, SlimRoots, and SlimWater, amongst others. An
overview of key SimComponents3 is described in Seidel et al.
[42]. Specifically, the biomass per species was calculated by
SimComponent LINTUL5Biomass, which considers water and
nitrogen limitation effects on biomass increment. The mixture
model was developed in the SIMPLACE framework and simu-
lates the splitting of solar radiation according to the competition
of the two species as well as the water and nitrogen uptake of
two crop species that are planted in a mixture. The model was
calibrated and tested on three environments (CKA 2020, 2021,
and WG 2020) based on collected data from the crops cultivated
solely and evaluated based on the data in the mixture treatments.
3More information about SIMPLACE components: https://www.
simplace.net/index.php/documentation
3
Results and Discussions
In this section, the results of the growth estimation models are
described at the beginning, as the accuracies of these models
are needed for the discussion of the image prediction results.
In the following, we first show the results of image prediction
with only temporal variation, which allows a comparison with
reference data, then simulations with further changed conditions,
and finally, the transferability to another experimental site.
3.1
Accuracy of projected leaf area estimation
Instance segmentation, which is used to derive PLA (projected
leaf area), is trained on a small subset of the corresponding
datasets for which reference segmentation masks are available.
Exact numbers for all datasets can be found in the bottom part
of Tab. 1. The reference masks of the test set specified there
are used to run the evaluation in Tab. 2. It shows the instance
segmentation accuracies using the measures AP and AR, which
- due to the direct derivation from these - correlates with the
accuracy of the PLA. The GrowliFlower accuracies are com-
parable to the results of Kierdorf et al. [25], i.e., sufficient to
evaluate cauliflower growth. Arabidopsis has a higher AP and
AR for bounding boxes and is at a comparable high level to
GrowliFlower for segmentation, thus also adequate to determine
PLA.
3.2
Accuracy of biomass estimation
The accuracy of dried biomass estimation for both MixedCrop
sites is given in Tab. 3. For mixtures the MAE is between
0.126 t/ha and 0.142 t/ha for SW and between 0.105 t/ha and
0.125 t/ha for FB. Notably, the ME is less than −0.01 t/ha for
mixtures at CKA and less than −0.03 t/ha at WG for both
species. For the monoculture reference fields, the MAE is
0.179 t/ha for FB in the FB monocultures and 0.188 t/ha for
SW in the SW monocultures. This is slightly higher than in the
mixtures, which is expected because in the monocultures, more
of each species grows in absolute terms than in the mixtures.
In return, the mixtures generally have a higher total biomass
[26]. The low estimation of SW on FB monocultures between
0.001 t/ha and 0.018 t/ha and vice versa FB on SW monocul-
tures between 0.003 t/ha and 0.017 t/ha can be considered as
additional evidence that the model is able to distinguish the
species with high accuracy. It can be assumed that a common
weed found in both fields, Chenopodium album, which bears
partial similarity to FB, is often incorrectly identified as FB.
The mean absolute error (MAE) will be lower if there are fewer
weeds or if it is included in the growth estimation model.
In Fig. 3, the overall results for CKA are visualized as two
scatter plots for SW and FB, where the estimations are plotted
against the reference from the process-based crop growth model.
The regression line is close to the optimal line with a minimal
underestimation for SW (ME = −0.026 t/ha) and a minimal
overestimation (ME = 0.005 t/ha) for FB. In total, the regres-
sion results are MAE = 0.14 t/ha and R2 = 0.99 for SW and
MAE = 0.10 t/ha and R2 = 0.98 for FB. With this, the model
is considered as accurate enough for an evaluation of generated
images.
When assessing the following results, it is important to consider
that the accuracy of the predicted images heavily relies on the
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
8
Bounding Box
Segmentation
AP
AP@0.50
AP@0.75
AR
AP
AP@0.50
AP@0.75
AR
Arabidopsis
0.92
0.99
0.99
0.95
0.77
0.99
0.98
0.78
GrowliFlower
0.86
0.96
0.92
0.88
0.78
0.97
0.92
0.82
Table 2: Mask R-CNN instance segmentation accuracies for the real (non-generated) images of the test set divided into bounding
box and segmentation. Overall average precision (AP), with thresholds at IoU = 0.50 and IoU = 0.75, and overall average recall
(AR) are given.
SW/FB Mix
SW mono
FB mono
Overall
MAE
ME
MAE
ME
MAE
ME
MAE
ME
Mixed-CKA
SW
0.142
-0.006
0.188
-0.074
0.001
0.001
0.142
-0.026
FB
0.125
-0.008
0.017
0.017
0.179
0.052
0.097
0.005
Mixed-WG
SW
0.126
-0.023
0.150
-0.050
0.018
0.018
0.122
-0.027
FB
0.105
-0.026
0.003
0.003
0.185
-0.046
0.082
-0.019
Table 3: Biomass estimation accuracies assessed by MAE and ME between the predictions from the real (non-generated) images
of the test set and reference values from the process-based crop growth model. The scores are separated for mixtures and SW resp.
FB monocultural fields. All units are given in t/ha.
accuracy of the growth estimation models. The accuracy of
these models is evaluated solely based on real reference images.
Any discrepancy between the growth estimation of these real
reference images and the predicted images can be attributed
to two factors. Firstly, it could be due to actual differences in
plant phenotypes compared to the reference images. This is the
deviation we aim to identify. Secondly, part of the deviation
may be caused by potential small corruptions or artifacts in
the artificial images, even if they pass GAN evaluation metrics.
These corruptions can lead to incorrect predictions by the growth
estimation model despite the visible plant phenotypes in the
artificial images being accurate. This is because the growth
estimation model was not trained on corrupted images. While
it is not possible to completely avoid or quantify the second
source of deviation, we strive to minimize it by augmenting the
data used to train the growth estimation model, making it more
robust and less susceptible to corruption.
3.3
Time-varying image prediction
The first image prediction experiment will evaluate how accu-
rately our framework predicts images of other growth stages
of the plant, given an input image and a different amount of
conditions used for training, as indicated in Tab. 4. For each
prediction, conditions are used that match the input image and
a randomly picked time-varying reference image of this plant.
Multiple models are trained on the different datasets and with a
varying combination of conditions, namely time (t), treatment
(trt), and simulated biomass (bm).
In Tab. 4, the predicted image quality is evaluated using the
metrics MS-SSIM, LPIPS, and FID. Across all predictions, the
highest accuracies are obtained with the Arabidopsis dataset for
all three metrics MS-SSIM=0.8, LPIPS=0.25, and FID=6.54,
while similarly lower overall accuracies are obtained with the
GrowliFlower and MixedCrop datasets. For these, the MS-SSIM
is between 0.29 and 0.31, LPIPS is between 0.46 and 0.51, and
FID is between 16.26 and 24.86. Particularly remarkable is the
dependence of the accuracy on the prediction distance, where
MS-SSIM is higher for all datasets, the smaller |∆t|. In the case
of ∆t = 0, the model acts as an autoencoder, meaning that it
reproduces the input, also known as identity mapping. In this
case, the results show an MS-SSIM of 0.94 for Arabidopsis and
MS-SSIM values between 0.97 and 0.99 for the Mixed-CKA
models. From short-term (ST) to long-term (LT) predictions,
the MS-SSIM decreases continuously up to 0.20.
It is noticeable that Arabidopsis has better values in all metrics
except T0 than GrowliFlower and Mixed-CKA, which can be
attributed to the daily recording times and controlled laboratory
conditions with constant light and no weather effects. The iden-
tity mapping (T0) is worse than the other datasets because in
the Arabidopsis dataset, multiple images were taken per day,
which means it is not a strict identity mapping. However, this
can be altered by changing the model time unit from days to
hours. The MS-SSIM decrease from T0 over ST to LT means
the less far the model predicts into the future or past, the better
the predicted images match the reference. Particularly, an MS-
SSIM below 0.3 implies less similarity between predicted and
reference images. In parallel, the FID for all models, including
ST and LT predictions, is below 25, which can be considered as
good image quality. This is expected because, with increasing
prediction steps, detailed plant appearances, like leaf counts and
orientations, are increasingly difficult to predict, while general
structural traits, like plant positions and overall sizes, can be
predicted more accurately.
Insight into the usability of predicted images can be drawn
from the plant-specific evaluation results using projected leaf
area (PLA) estimation for Arabidopsis and GrowliFlower and
biomass (BM) estimation for MixedCrop. Tab. 5 shows the
obtained results for Arabidopsis and GrowliFlower in Tab. 5. It
can be seen that MAE increases with larger |∆t| in both cases,
but the overall accuracy of <1 % is high for Arabidopsis and
with <10 % slightly lower for GrowliFlower.In addition, for Ara-
bidopsis, a mean error of −0.32 % ≈−11 mm2 indicates a small
mean underestimation, while GrowliFlower heads are predicted
larger ME = 1.27 % ≈80 cm2 than the corresponding reference.
The biomass evaluation for Mixed-CKA in Tab. 6 is divided into
models trained with different conditions. All scores are given
separately for SW and FB; moreover, an average over all field
plots and all mixture plots is reported. The MAE separation
into different prediction distances shows that for T0 the lowest
deviations occur with a small increase to ST, but a decrease
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
9
Figure 3: Scatter results of dried biomass estimation from Mixed-CKA imagery over all growth stages and all treatments (mixtures
and monocultural fields) split up in spring wheat (SW) and faba bean (FB) for Mixed-CKA.
Train conds.
MS-SSIM (↑)
LPIPS (↓)
FID (↓)
t trt bm
T0
ST
LT
ø
ø
ø
Arabidopsis
✓
×
×
0.94
0.81
0.68
0.80
0.25
6.54
GrowliFlower
✓
×
×
0.98
0.30
0.20
0.29
0.51
20.17
Mixed-CKA
✓
×
×
0.99
0.23
0.22
0.30
0.46
20.44
Mixed-CKA
✓
✓
×
0.97
0.25
0.23
0.31
0.47
16.26
Mixed-CKA
✓
✓
✓
0.99
0.23
0.22
0.29
0.46
24.86
Mixed-WG1
✓
×
×
0.92
0.13
0.11
0.20
0.50
40.67
Table 4: Evaluation with metrics MS-SSIM, LPIPS, and FID. Each row represents a distinct model, each trained with an input
image along with the specified conditions; for testing, only the input image and t are varied. MS-SSIM is reported for generations
with different |∆t| filters: T0: identity |∆t| = 0; ST: short-term 1 ≤|∆t| ≤10; LT: long-term |∆t| ≥11.
(accuracy gain) for LT over ST. The overall MAE ranges from
0.13 t/ha to 0.38 t/ha and is comparable to Mix MAE, where
only the crop mixture field plots are integrated. Thereby, overall
SW MAE is always higher than FB MAE with a magnitude
of up to 0.1 t/h. Noticeably, overall FB ME is negative while
SW ME is positive for all models except those trained on all
conditions, showing a systematic SW over- and a FB underes-
timation. With an increasing number of conditions, the overall
MAE decreases significantly by 0.2 t/ha for SW and 0.15 t/ha
for FB. Comparing the accuracy when biomass estimation is
performed on predicted mixtures (last two columns of Tab. 6)
with the accuracy when it is performed on real mixtures (first
two columns of Tab. 3) two results are shown: First, the MAE
of the predicted mixtures using the model with all conditions is
slightly above the MAE of the real mixtures (SW: +0.04 t/ha,
FB: +0.03 t/ha). The other models trained with fewer conditions
show higher deviations up to 0.17 t/ha for SW and 0.13 t/ha for
FB. Second, the ME of the predicted mixtures using the model
with all conditions is by a magnitude of 5 above the ME of the
real mixtures.
We provide two assumptions for the SW and FB differences
in MAE and ME: We assume that having for SW a generally
higher MAE magnitude than for FB is caused by the higher
absolute SW biomass level in the field. Additionally, we assume
the reason for the systematic overestimation of SW and under-
estimation of FB (indicated by ME) is due to the unbalanced
dataset: there are significantly more SW than FB monocultures.
We argue that the image prediction model copes worse with this
unbalanced dataset than the growth estimation model. Besides,
MAE and ME decrease significantly as more conditions are
added to the model. This can be explained by the model being
better informed about the crop growth behavior if it receives
more growth-influencing factors and can thus become more ac-
curate. There is a loss of accuracy from identity mapping to
short-term predictions but no significant loss of accuracy from
short-term to long-term predictions. Thus, long-term predictions
can be considered valuable for phenotyping applications.
So, the quantitative evaluation leads to the overall finding: Al-
though the predicted images do match the reference images less
at large |∆t|, they represent realistic plants of their respective
growth stage, as indicated by FID, and are still accurate enough
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
10
Train conds.
MAE
ME
t trt bm
T0
ST
LT
ø
ø
Arabidopsis
✓
×
×
0.27
0.76
1.44
0.82
-0.32
GrowliFlower
✓
×
×
6.41
8.84
10.18
9.64
1.27
Table 5: Plant-specific evaluation with projected leaf area (PLA) assessed by MAE and ME in the unit %/image. MAE is reported
for generations with different |∆t| filters: T0: identity |∆t| = 0; ST: short-term 1 ≤|∆t| ≤10; LT: long-term |∆t| ≥11.
Train
OA
OA
Mix
Mix
conds.
MAE
ME
MAE
ME
t trt bm
T0
ST
LT
ø
ø
ø
ø
Mixed-CKA
✓
×
×
SW
0.22
0.42
0.39
0.38
0.12
0.31
0.20
FB
0.16
0.34
0.30
0.28
-0.12
0.25
-0.17
Mixed-CKA
✓
✓
×
SW
0.30
0.22
0.25
0.24
0.09
0.25
0.15
FB
0.24
0.16
0.19
0.19
-0.13
0.24
-0.15
Mixed-CKA
✓
✓
✓
SW
0.17
0.21
0.18
0.18
-0.02
0.18
0.05
FB
0.11
0.16
0.14
0.13
-0.01
0.15
-0.04
Mixed-WG
1
✓
×
×
SW
0.45
1.25
1.14
1.07
0.18
1.06
0.24
FB
0.41
0.48
0.67
0.64
-0.04
0.62
-0.11
Table 6: Plant-specific evaluation with biomass (BM) assessed by MAE and ME in the unit t/ha given for all (OA) and mixture
(Mix) fields and divided into spring wheat (SW) and faba bean (FB) biomasses. Overall MAE is reported for generations with
different |∆t| filters: T0: identity |∆t| = 0; ST: short-term 1 ≤|∆t| ≤10; LT: long-term |∆t| ≥11.
to derive reasonable plant traits, as indicated by plant-specific
evaluation.
Further findings can be drawn from qualitative results showing
hand-picked time-varying image prediction results in Fig. 4 for
Arabidopsis, Fig. 5 for GrowliFlower, and Fig. 6 for Mixed-
CKA, where models are used that are trained on the temporal
condition only. Each figure consists of 5 rows: The first row
contains a reference plant over time, where an early growth stage
with a cyan frame is the input to the model in each case. The
second row shows generated images by keeping except time
all other conditions, including noise z, constant. The third row
shows the variability image, which is the standard deviation over
10 predictions of the same time point with different z, whereby
the standard deviation is averaged over all RGB channels and
overdrawn by a factor of four for clearer visualization. The
darker the blue, the greater the variability for each pixel within
the 10 predictions. The fourth and fifth rows show the classical
and plant-specific evaluation metrics for each gen-ref image pair.
For all datasets and time points, the predictions are realistic,
with a few exceptions, such as the last image of GrowliFlower.
Comparing the variability images, Arabidopsis has the low-
est pixel-wise standard deviation, followed by MixedCrop and
GrowliFlower. In all cases, there is high variability at the leaf
edges, where the actual uncertainty is greatest. The LPIPS and
MS-SSIM deteriorate with increasing ∆t with a peak each for
identity mapping. Plant property curves differ for each data set:
In Arabidopsis, ∆PLA is close to zero until 30 DAS and then
drifts into the negative range, indicating a leaf area underestima-
tion for advanced growth stages. In GrowliFlower, the curve is
close to zero with small fluctuations except for a large negative
peak at 57 DAP, indicating that the leaf area could not be cor-
rectly estimated from the predicted image of this day. Similarly,
for Mixed-CKA, the curves stay around zero until day 99, after
which SW biomass is significantly overestimated with up to
2.5 t/ha and FB biomass is significantly underestimated with up
to −2.5 t/ha.
There are two important insights that emerge from the visualized
images. First, a strong consistency of the generated images over
time is given, which is visible in Arabidopsis and GrowliFlower
through leaf orientations but also through neighboring plants
and in Mixed-CKA through certain crop patterns such as small
gaps (second crop row, right) or weeds (third and fourth crop
row, center). Second, the dependence of the generated images
on the input is visible for all datasets, particularly in the position
of the plants and crop rows and by granules on the ground,
which can be found on the input image as well as on several
generated images. While the variability images show realistic
uncertainties at the leaf edges, they also reveal a limitation in
the image prediction: While the identity mapping has no or
extremely low variability, as expected, no continuous increase
in variability over time is evident, leading to overconfidence at
large ∆t where variability would be expected to be significantly
higher. The parallel examination of MS-SSIM and LPIPS with
the images confirms the findings from the quantitative results:
Despite the images being less consistent with the reference as
the prediction distance increases, there is neither a general visual
quality decrease nor a general decrease in the accuracy of the
estimated plant traits for time-varying predictions.
An overview of predictions for days not present in the datasets,
so temporally out-of-distribution (OOD) can be found in Ap-
pendix B. While challenging due to large spectral differences
between images of existing time points, it can be shown that
realistic images can still be generated at new time points.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
11
Figure 4: Time-varying image prediction for Arabidopsis with, in the top row, reference images with an early growth stage
as input (cyan frame), in the second row, all day-wise generated predictions, and, in the third row, standard deviation images
over 10 predictions with different noise input z and otherwise constant input conditions. The two bottom rows have the quality
metrics: learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS), multiscale structural similarity (MS-SSIM), and the projected leaf area
difference (∆PLA)
3.4
Data-driven simulation using treatment information
The data-driven simulations on the MixedCrop dataset are in-
tended to show the flexibility of the image-prediction model
in the presence of changing growth-influencing variables. To
enable an illustrative and informative demonstration and visual-
ization, we systematically vary the time (t) and treatment (trt)
information as a condition for the Mixed-CKA dataset. We
use the results to investigate and evaluate how different treat-
ments appear in the future when something about the treatment
changes starting from a certain initial condition (image). We
would like to emphasize that the performed change in treatments
is intended for the evaluation of the method and is thus limited
in its realistic nature, yet aims to show that our framework is
applicable to realistic scenarios. Our expectation is that the esti-
mated biomass from the data-driven simulation changes in the
same direction as that of the process-based plant growth model,
confirming the reliable image predictions of our system.
In particular, two simulations are conducted from the input
time point of 28 DAS to 54 DAS where first, the seed density is
changed from low (L) to high (H) (Fig. 7), and second, the faba
bean cultivar is changed from Mallory (A) to Fanfare (B) (Fig. 8).
Thus, the input image is encoded in the original treatment, but a
treatment change is made to decode the simulated future plant
phenotype. The figures compare the data-driven prediction with-
out treatment change (filled bars) with the prediction including
treatment change (hashed bars) and the process-based predic-
tions for the respective target treatment (red dots). Since there
are multiple replicates for each treatment, the bars represent the
mean, and the black lines represent the standard deviation. We
deliberately chose an early stage as the input because the differ-
ences in biomass between the treatments are not yet too great,
and differences between the FB varieties are hardly discernible.
However, we do not use DAS=7, which is bare soil, because
we do want to observe the spatial development of the crops. In
addition, we focus on mixtures in the simulations to be able to
analyze the biomass of spring wheat and faba bean in parallel.
Focusing on the simulation of L→H in Fig. 7, the data-driven
estimated biomass of the high-density simulated treatments
(hashed bars) is higher than that of the low-density simulated
ones (filled bars) for SW in 20/24 cases and for FB in 16/24
cases. The process-based biomass gain from L→H, shown by
the red dots, is for SW significantly higher (0.25 t/ha) than for
FB (<0.1 t/ha). On average, over all treatments, the biomass
increases for both SW and FB. It is noticeable that FB biomass
is slightly overestimated compared to the reference in almost all
cases and that SW biomass is often overestimated for the L→L
simulation while underestimated for L→H.
The analysis of the simulation of faba bean cultivar A→B in
Fig. 8 is more challenging because only a small loss of biomass
is expected for FB and an even smaller one for SW (almost
the same level), as shown by the red dots. Treatment-wise,
this decrease is not clearly visible for either SW or FB. Only
in slightly more than half of the treatments is the hashed bar
smaller than the filled bar for both SW (13/24) and FB (15/24).
In average over all treatments, the hashed bars are smaller than
the filled bares, albeit in the range of the standard deviation.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
12
Figure 5: Time-varying image prediction for GrowliFlower with, in the top row, reference images with an early growth stage
as input (cyan frame), in the second row, all day-wise generated predictions, and, in the third row, standard deviation images
over 10 predictions with different noise input z and otherwise constant input conditions. The two bottom rows show the quality
metrics: learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS), multiscale structural similarity (MS-SSIM), and the projected leaf area
difference (∆PLA)
Comparing high and low-density treatments, it can be seen that
the estimated biomass from the high-density treatments is higher
for SW in 10/12 cases and for FB in 7/12 cases.
Both simulation results show that even small changes in the
growth-influencing factors affect the predicted images. Thereby,
the reliability of the simulations is supported by the overall
biomass increase from L→H treatments and decrease from faba
bean cultivar A→B. If the prediction change (filled to hashed
bar) for individual treatments does not correspond to the ex-
pected change (red dots), there are three possible interpretations.
First, although the treatment condition is taken into account in
the image prediction model, its influence might not be strong
enough, so the differences in the generated images are not suffi-
ciently prominent. Second, the density resp. cultivar appearance
of the input image might be already too prominent, making it
difficult to change the growth stage at a later point; e.g., plants
cannot arise from anywhere. Third, the differences between
low and high-density treatments resp. faba bean cultivars A
and B are less clear in reality than the dynamic crop growth
model suggests. In fact, the FB biomass gain for L→H and the
FB/SW biomass loss for A→B is below the accuracy level of
the biomass estimation (compare Tab. 6, which can explain why
a clear trend in biomass changes is not particularly apparent for
these cases. Another example where this simulation could be
applied in practice is the prediction of weed pressure. Apart
from this experiment, we see the potential to simulate further
treatment changes or their effects, e.g., weed cover. This varies
over the growing season and can be estimated quickly in cat-
egorical measures (low, medium, high), allowing crop growth
predictions adapted to current field conditions.
Fig. 9 also qualitatively illustrates the structural differences in
the crop rows when simulating different treatments. Besides
the growth prediction step from 28 DAS to 54 DAS, two more
growth prediction steps and two more treatment variations are
simulated, including more unlikely scenarios, such as transfor-
mations of mixtures to monocultures. While such simulations
rarely make sense from an application point of view, as long as
a mixture component is not completely suppressed, it is never-
theless noteworthy to see the model visualizing such a treatment
change if necessary.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
13
Figure 6: Time-varying image prediction for Mixed-CKA with, in the top row, reference images with an early growth stage as
input (cyan frame), in the second row, all day-wise generated predictions, and, in the third row, standard deviation images over 10
predictions with different noise input z and otherwise constant input conditions. The two bottom rows show the quality metrics:
learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS), multiscale structural similarity (MS-SSIM), and the biomass differences for
spring wheat (∆BMSW) and faba bean (∆BMFB)
3.5
Data-driven simulation using process-based biomass
The following biomass simulation is intended to demonstrate the
capability of including dynamic output variables of a process-
based crop growth model in our framework. For this, we use
the trained Mixed-CKA model on time (t), treatment (trt), and
process-based simulated biomass (bm), whereby the biomass
systematically varied in order to get predictions for different
possible SW and FB biomass ratios. The time is randomly var-
ied, so the simulation is performed over all growth stages by
choosing a random prediction time point for each input mixture
image and re-adjusting its biomass ratio. The starting point for
the simulation is the biomasses calculated dynamically from
the process-based crop growth model for each time point and
treatment, BMSW = BMFB = 100 %. While the image prediction
model was trained with a fixed biomass value attached to each
reference image, we will demonstrate that almost any combi-
nation of biomass ratios can be chosen for inference as long as
they are within the range of the training data.
Fig. 10 shows MAE and ME respectively for SW and FB and dif-
ferent simulated biomass ratios, where the original composition
(100:100) is shown in the middle, to the left, BMFB increases
and to the right BMSW. This is accordingly also noticeable in the
ME: If the BM fraction for SW and FB increases, more biomass
is also estimated in the predicted image so that the ME increases.
So MESW rises to the right, and the MEFB rises to the left. The
MAE reaches the minimum point at about the point where ME
is also minimum at about the ratio 55 % SW to 145 % FB.
That a higher SW simulated biomass in the input of the frame-
work also leads to a higher SW prediction in the output, for FB,
accordingly, shows the reliability of our framework to gener-
ate predictions that realistically depend on the input conditions.
This demonstrates the capability of our framework to gener-
ate images that plausibly explain the output of a process-based
model. The reason why the minimum MAE/ME is not reached
at the 100:100 state is mainly due to a slight dataset bias to-
wards SW and the resulting under-prediction of FB plants in
the images, as already discussed. Assuming an unbiased im-
age prediction model, we argue that this type of analysis can
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
14
Figure 7: Simulating the SW (top) and FB (bottom) change from a low (L) density to a high (H) density treatment for all mixture
field plots and the growth prediction step 28 DAS to 54 DAS. While filled bars represent the comparative prediction under the
original treatment, hashed bars represent the simulated treatment change. Black lines symbolize the standard deviation across
treatment replicates; red dots symbolize the outcome of the process-based crop growth model for the resp. treatments and 54 DAS.
serve to improve the calibration of the process-based model and
bring it closer to image-based field observations: If the mini-
mum MAE deviates from the expected minimum (in this case,
100:100), the process-based crop growth model could be ad-
justed in this direction or, in other words, complemented by the
knowledge gained from the image time series. Note that other
dynamic growth-influencing variables, like climatic conditions,
can be used instead of process-based time-varying biomass,
which could lead to even more feasible simulations.
3.6
Transferability to new site
With a transferability experiment on the MixedCrop experiment,
we aim to investigate the accuracy drop with which the model
trained for Mixed-CKA, which takes time (t) as input condition,
can be applied to the Mixed-WG site. The basic requirements
are given by the same image size, resolution, crop species, and
treatments (see Sec. 2.1). However, this attempt to transfer the
growth behavior of Mixed-CKA to images of Mixed-WG poses
three main challenges. First, the growth behavior of convention-
ally managed CKA differs substantially from that of organically
managed WG, as indicated, for instance, by weed abundance.
Second, the spectral image properties are completely different
for each time point, so both sites have their own “style”. Third,
images were not taken at the same time during the growing
season at both locations, resulting in images from WG being not
only spatially but also temporally out-of-disturbance (OOD).
Tab. 4 and Tab. 6 show the transferability quality measured by
all evaluation metrics in the bottom line each. It can be seen
that the results show significantly lower accuracies than the
ones produced by models trained and tested on Mixed-CKA.
However, the identity predictions still show a high MS-SSIM of
0.92.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
15
The reason for the less accurate results lies in the first two afore-
mentioned challenges, which lead to the predicted images not
being well comparable to the reference images on a quantitative
basis. Since the model only knows the style of CKA, but the
reference images are in the style of WG, better scores were not
expected. Putting the focus more on qualitative results, the third
challenge of temporal OOD leads to corrupted results when the
input image is significantly different from the style of the tem-
porally nearest CKA image but is otherwise reliable, which is
demonstrated in Appendix C. It shows both failed predictions
and reasonable transfer examples, first for time points for which
reference images are available, even if they do not match the
reference, and second for the entire growing period.
For future experiments, the style could be added as an additional
condition in the image-prediction model, or more generally
with domain knowledge in the form of site-dependent context
variables that influence not only style but also plant growth
itself [43]. While this requires a larger training dataset spanning
multiple sites and styles, it will ensure even better transferability
and could help to merge multiple plant time series affected by
various factors influencing factors into a more generic data-
driven crop growth model.
4
Conclusion
In this work, we have shown the capabilities of multi-
conditional growth simulation using three datasets Arabidopsis,
GrowliFlower, and MixedCrop. For this purpose, in the first
step, we combined several conditions of different types (discrete,
continuous, categorical) in an image prediction model, which is
a conditional Wasserstein generative adversarial network (CW-
GAN), to generate multiple realistic high-quality images over
time based on a single input image. In the second step of growth
estimation, we showed that along with classical GAN image eval-
uation metrics, plant-specific traits such as projected leaf area or
biomass can be derived from the generated images and used for
evaluation. The results for MixedCrop were compared with a
dynamic process-based growth model. Here, the combination
of data-driven crop growth models, which strongly incorporate
the spatio-temporal above-ground phenotype changes, and a
process-based crop growth model, which takes the theoretical
plant growth knowledge into account, leads to a better under-
standing of the crop mixture dynamics. The experiments show
that the dried biomass can be estimated more accurately from
predicted images the more growth influencing factors are con-
sidered, such as in our case, the field treatment or process-based
simulated biomasses. In particular, the integration of process-
based model output into a data-driven crop growth model is
shown, which is useful to make crop growth predictions more
accessible or even to re-calibrate process-based models. Adding
all available conditions into the image prediction model allows
plant trait estimation on predicted (artificial) images with similar
accuracy as on real images.
Although the additional variability images show the largest un-
certainties at the leaf edges, which is realistic, we see space for
improvement in the uncertainty integration for long-term growth
predictions. Since predictions far in the future lead to significant
over-confidence in the image prediction model, the noise-input
ratio should be adaptively controlled depending on the growth
prediction step. In addition, the challenge of large spectral dif-
ferences within an image sequence and between sites (“dataset
styles”) should be addressed for better model generalizability.
Acknowledgements
We thank Julie Krämer, Christian Dahn, and Nils Müller for
comprehensive (image) data acquisition and fruitful discussions,
as well as Philippe Simonis, Malte Möller, and Manikandan
Somu for data pre-processing and selection in the MixedCrop
project.
Funding
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excel-
lence Strategy – EXC 2070 – 390732324 and partly funded by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) - SFB 1502/1-2022 - Projektnummer: 450058266“.
References
[1] Farooq Shah and Wei Wu. Soil and crop management
strategies to ensure higher crop productivity within sustain-
able environments. Sustainability, 11(5):1485, 2019. doi:
10.3390/su11051485.
[2] Deepranjan Sarkar, Saswat Kumar Kar, Arghya Chattopad-
hyay, Amitava Rakshit, Vinod Kumar Tripathi, Pradeep Ku-
mar Dubey, Purushothaman Chirakkuzhyil Abhilash, et al.
Low input sustainable agriculture:
A viable climate-
smart option for boosting food production in a warming
world. Ecological Indicators, 115:106412, 2020. doi:
10.1016/j.ecolind.2020.106412.
[3] Erik S. Jensen, Mark B. Peoples, and Henrik Hauggaard-
Nielsen. Faba bean in cropping systems. Field Crops
Research, 115(3):203–216, 2010. ISSN 0378-4290. doi:
10.1016/j.fcr.2009.10.008. Faba Beans in Sustainable Agri-
culture.
[4] Long Li, Shu-Min Li, Jian-Hao Sun, Li-Li Zhou, Xing-
Guo Bao, Hong-Gang Zhang, and Fu-Suo Zhang. Di-
versity enhances agricultural productivity via rhizosphere
phosphorus facilitation on phosphorus-deficient soils. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(27):
11192–11196, 2007. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0704591104.
[5] MB Peoples, J Brockwell, DF Herridge, IJ Rochester, BJR
Alves, S Urquiaga, RM Boddey, FD Dakora, S Bhattarai,
SL Maskey, et al. The contributions of nitrogen-fixing
crop legumes to the productivity of agricultural systems.
Symbiosis, 48:1–17, 2009. doi: 10.1007/BF03179980.
[6] Laurent Bedoussac,
Etienne-Pascal Journet,
Henrik
Hauggaard-Nielsen, Christophe Naudin, Guenaelle Corre-
Hellou, Erik Steen Jensen, Loïc Prieur, and Eric Justes.
Ecological principles underlying the increase of productiv-
ity achieved by cereal-grain legume intercrops in organic
farming. a review. Agronomy for sustainable development,
35:911–935, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s13593-014-0277-7.
[7] Yang Yu, Tjeerd-Jan Stomph, David Makowski, Lizhen
Zhang, and Wopke Van Der Werf. A meta-analysis of
relative crop yields in cereal/legume mixtures suggests
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
16
options for management. Field Crops Research, 198:269–
279, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.fcr.2016.08.001.
[8] Sotirios A Tsaftaris, Massimo Minervini, and Hanno
Scharr. Machine learning for plant phenotyping needs
image processing. Trends in plant science, 21(12):989–
991, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2016.10.002.
[9] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio.
Generative adversarial nets.
In
Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 2672–2680, 2014.
doi:
2969033.2969125.
[10] Haseeb Nazki, Sook Yoon, Alvaro Fuentes, and Dong Sun
Park. Unsupervised image translation using adversarial
networks for improved plant disease recognition. Com-
puters and Electronics in Agriculture, 168:105–117, 2020.
doi: 10.1016/j.compag.2019.105117.
[11] Simon L Madsen, Mads Dyrmann, Rasmus N Jørgensen,
and Henrik Karstoft. Generating artificial images of plant
seedlings using generative adversarial networks. Biosys-
tems Engineering, 187:147–159, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.
biosystemseng.2019.09.005.
[12] Yezi Zhu, Marc Aoun, Marcel Krijn, Joaquin Vanschoren,
and High Tech Campus. Data augmentation using condi-
tional generative adversarial networks for leaf counting in
arabidopsis plants. In Proc. of the British Machine Vision
Conference (BMVC), page 324, 2018.
[13] Jana Kierdorf, Immanuel Weber, Anna Kicherer, Laura
Zabawa, Lukas Drees, and Ribana Roscher.
Behind
the leaves - estimation of occluded grapevine berries
with conditional generative adversarial networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.10325, 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2105.10325.
[14] Robail Yasrab, Jincheng Zhang, Polina Smyth, and
Michael P Pound.
Predicting plant growth from time-
series data using deep learning. Remote Sensing, 13(3):
331, 2021. doi: 10.3390/rs13030331.
[15] Lukas Drees, Laura Verena Junker-Frohn, Jana Kierdorf,
and Ribana Roscher. Temporal prediction and evaluation
of brassica growth in the field using conditional genera-
tive adversarial networks. Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture, 190:106415, 2021. ISSN 0168-1699. doi:
10.1016/j.compag.2021.106415.
[16] Lukas Drees, Immanuel Weber, Marc Rußwurm, and Rib-
ana Roscher. Time dependent image generation of plants
from incomplete sequences with cnn-transformer. In Björn
Andres, Florian Bernard, Daniel Cremers, Simone Frin-
trop, Bastian Goldlücke, and Ivo Ihrke, editors, Proc. of
the DAGM German Conference on Pattern Recognition
(GCPR), pages 495–510, Cham, 2022. Springer Inter-
national Publishing.
ISBN 978-3-031-16788-1.
doi:
10.1007/978-3-031-16788-1_30.
[17] Miro Miranda, Lukas Drees, and Ribana Roscher. Con-
trolled multi-modal image generation for plant growth
modeling. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conference
on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pages 5118–5124, 2022.
doi: 10.1109/ICPR56361.2022.9956115.
[18] Mohamad Shahbazi, Martin Danelljan, Danda Pani Paudel,
and Luc Van Gool. Collapse by conditioning: Training
class-conditional GANs with limited data. In Proc. of
the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2201.06578.
[19] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative
adversarial nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784, 2014.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1411.1784.
[20] Augustus Odena, Christopher Olah, and Jonathon Shlens.
Conditional image synthesis with auxiliary classifier gans.
In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (ICML), pages 2642–2651. PMLR, 2017.
[21] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Samuli Laine,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Training generative ad-
versarial networks with limited data. In H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors,
Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pages 12104–12114. Cur-
ran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[22] Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kud-
lur.
A learned representation for artistic style.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1610.07629, 2016. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
1610.07629.
[23] Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large
scale gan training for high fidelity natural image synthe-
sis. In Proc. of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1809.
11096.
[24] Jonathan Bell and Hannah M. Dee.
Aberystwyth leaf
evaluation dataset. Zenodo, page 168158, 2016. doi: 10.
5281/zenodo.168158.
[25] Jana Kierdorf, Laura Verena Junker-Frohn, Mike De-
laney, Mariele Donoso Olave, Andreas Burkart, Hannah
Jaenicke, Onno Muller, Uwe Rascher, and Ribana Roscher.
Growliflower: An image time-series dataset for growth
analysis of cauliflower. Journal of Field Robotics, 40(2):
173–192, 2023. doi: 10.1002/rob.22122.
[26] Madhuri R Paul, Dereje T Demie, Sabine J Seidel, and
Thomas F Döring. Effects of spring wheat/faba bean mix-
tures on early crop development. Plant and Soil, pages
1–16, 2023. doi: 10.1007/s11104-023-06111-6.
[27] Dereje T. Demie, Thomas F. Döring, Maria R. Finckh,
Wopke van der Werf, Jérôme Enjalbert, and Sabine J. Sei-
del. Mixture × genotype effects in cereal/legume inter-
cropping. Frontiers in Plant Science, 13, 2022. ISSN
1664-462X. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.846720.
[28] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent
Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Improved training of
wasserstein gans. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett,
editors, Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS), NIPS’17, page 5769–5779,
Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN
9781510860964.
[29] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou.
Wasserstein GAN. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07875, 2017.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1701.07875.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
17
[30] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[31] Harm De Vries, Florian Strub, Jérémie Mary, Hugo
Larochelle, Olivier Pietquin, and Aaron C Courville. Mod-
ulating early visual processing by language. In Proc. of
the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), volume 30, 2017.
[32] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization:
Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal
covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1502.03167.
[33] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks.
In Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 4401–4410, 2019.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00453.
[34] Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved reg-
ularization of convolutional neural networks with cutout.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.1708.04552.
[35] Zhou Wang, Eero P Simoncelli, and Alan C Bovik. Multi-
scale structural similarity for image quality assessment. In
Proc. of the Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems &
Computers, volume 2, pages 1398–1402. IEEE, 2003. doi:
10.1109/ACSSC.2003.1292216.
[36] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shecht-
man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of
deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proc. of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 586–595, 2018. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.
00068.
[37] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. GANs trained by
a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equi-
librium. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 6626–6637, 2017.
[38] Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross
Girshick. Mask R-CNN. In Proc. of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 2961–2969,
2017. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.322.
[39] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton.
Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural net-
works. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 1097–1105, 2012.
doi: 10.1145/3065386.
[40] Qusai Marashdeh, Lukas Drees, and Ribana Roscher. Se-
mantic uav image segmentation of mixed cropping fields.
In Proc. of the Dreiländertagung der DGPF, der OVG
und der SGPF in Dreseden - Publikationen der DGPF,
volume 30, pages 140–148, 2022.
[41] Andreas Enders, Murilo Vianna, Thomas Gaiser, Gunther
Krauss, Heidi Webber, Amit Kumar Srivastava, Sabine Ju-
lia Seidel, Andreas Tewes, Ehsan Eyshi Rezaei, and Frank
Ewert. Simplace—a versatile modelling and simulation
framework for sustainable crops and agroecosystems. in
silico Plants, 5(1):1–18, 2023. doi: 10.1093/insilicoplants/
diad006.
[42] SJ Seidel, T Gaiser, T Kautz, SL Bauke, W Amelung,
K Barfus, F Ewert, and M Athmann. Estimation of the
impact of precrops and climate variability on soil depth-
differentiated spring wheat growth and water, nitrogen and
phosphorus uptake. Soil and Tillage Research, 195:104427,
2019. doi: 10.1016/j.still.2019.104427.
[43] Johannes Leonhardt, Lukas Drees, Jürgen Gall, and Ribana
Roscher. Leveraging bioclimatic context for supervised
and self-supervised land cover classification. In Proc. of
the DAGM German Conference on Pattern Recognition
(GCPR), 2023.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
18
Figure 8: Simulating the SW (top) and FB (bottom) change from faba bean cultivar Mallory (A) to cultivar Fanfare (B) for all
mixture field plots and the growth prediction step 28 DAS to 54 DAS. While filled bars represent the comparative prediction under
the original treatment, hashed bars represent the simulated treatment change. Black lines symbolize the standard deviation across
treatment replicates; red dots symbolize the outcome of the process-based crop growth model for the resp. treatments and 54 DAS.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
19
Input
Mix_A_2_L
Reference
Mix_A_2_L
Prediction
Mix_A_2_L
Simulation
Mix_B_2_L
Simulation
Mix_A_2_H
Simulation
FB_A_L
Simulation
SW_2_L
Figure 9: Growth simulation for different prediction steps and treatment changes in Mixed-CKA, first row 28 DAS to 45 DAS,
second row 42 DAS to 99 DAS, and third row 7 DAS to 82 DAS. The first column shows the input image, the second the
corresponding reference image of the future growth stage, the third the predicted image at these treatment conditions, and columns
4 to 7 show simulations of change in faba bean cultivar, density, and to monocultural reference.
50:150
60:140
70:130
80:120
90:110
100:100
110:90
120:80
130:70
140:60
150:50
Biomass-Ratio of SW:FB [%]
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Error [t/ha]
MAESW
MAEFB
MESW (gen-ref)
MEFB (gen-ref)
Figure 10: Comparing MAE and ME for image predictions from 28 DAS to 54 DAS with different expected spring wheat (SW) to
faba bean (FB) biomass ratios.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
20
FB (Faba bean)
A
Mallory
B
Fanfare
SW (spring wheat)
1
Lennox
2
Anabel
3
Saludo
4
Jasmund
5
Sorbas
6
Quintus
7
KWS Starlight
8
Chamsin
9
Sonett
10
SU Ahab
11
Mix-Group 1
12
Mix-Group 2
Table 7: Notation overview of species faba bean (FB) with
cultivars A and B and spring wheat (SW) with cultivars 1-10
and two additional mixed groups used in this work.
Appendix A
Overview of MixedCrop cultivars
An overview of the faba bean cultivars and spring wheat entities
used in the MixedCrop experiment is given in Tab. 7.
Appendix B
Temporal out-of-distribution
predictions
By temporal out-of-distribution (OOD), we mean images of
growth stages that do not exist in the training dataset. We use
the models from the respective dataset trained only on input
image and time as conditions and keep the input image and
the noise constant for the visualizations from the entire growth
period. So we iterate over time and generate interpolations if the
newly generated image lies between two training images and ex-
trapolations if it lies temporally off the training period (early and
late growth phases). The time increases by one day per image
from top left to bottom right. The input image has a cyan frame,
the in-distribution images a blue frame, and the OOD images an
orange frame. While difficult to evaluate quantitatively because
no reference images are available, consistency in the time series
is readily apparent for interpolations. For extrapolations, most
predictions are also realistic since plants continue to grow in
the short-term extrapolated future. Notably, interpolation and
extrapolation work for Mixed-WG, although the growth stage of
the input image is temporally out-of-distribution. However, there
are exceptions, e.g., the early growth stages of Arabidopsis are
too large, and in the third row of Mixed-CKA and Mixed-WG
canopy appears and vanishes again.
Appendix C
Spatial out-of-distribution
predictions
If the image prediction model is applied to a site on whose
plant image time series the model has not been trained, it is
spatially out-of-distribution. Additionally, it is likely that the
dataset is temporally OOD if the drone flyovers did not occur
on the same days of the growing season, and thus, the time of
the new input image does not exist in the training data. There,
transferability fails when the spectral differences between the
test image and the nearby time points in the training dataset are
too large, such as 29 DAS of Mixed-WG, as Fig. 14 illustrates.
Some of the predicted images become blurry, and holes appear in
the crop rows, which also causes the biomass estimation to give
unreliable, non-usable results. Likewise, Fig. 15 demonstrates
that the model can produce reasonable results despite spatio-
temporal OOD, where, compared to Fig. 14, the same field
patch but a different input image (21 days later) is used. Realistic
results can also be achieved when not only the input image but
also the images to be predicted are temporally and spatially
OOD, as depicted in Fig. 16.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
21
Figure 11: Daily Arabidopsis predictions from 18 DAS to 41 DAS including temporal OOD images. The input image has a cyan
frame, the in-distribution images a blue frame, and the OOD images an orange frame.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
22
Figure 12: Daily GrowliFlower predictions from 0 DAP to 73 DAP including temporal OOD images. The input image has a cyan
frame, the in-distribution images a blue frame, and the OOD images an orange frame.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
23
Figure 13: Daily Mixed-CKA predictions from 0 DAS to 121 DAS including temporal OOD images. The input image has a cyan
frame, the in-distribution images a blue frame, and the OOD images an orange frame.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
24
Figure 14: Transferability fails with predictions for Mixed-WG caused by input image 29 DAS lying spectrally too far out of the
training distribution (Mixed-CKA images).
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
25
Figure 15: Transferability with prediction results for Mixed-WG input image 50 DAS lying spectrally less far away from the
54 DAS-images of the training distribution (Mixed-CKA). The predicted images are qualitatively appealing, while they do not
compare well with the reference, because the crops of Mixed-CKA and Mixed-WG have different growth patterns.
Preprint – Data-driven Crop Growth Simulation on Time-varying Generated Images using Multi-conditional GANs
26
Figure 16: Daily Mixed-WG predictions from 0 DAS to 121 DAS including temporal OOD images from an image prediction
model trained exclusively on Mixed-CKA images.
