The Use of Cronbach’s Alpha When Developing
and Reporting Research Instruments in Science Education
Keith S. Taber1
# The Author(s) 2016. This article is an open access publication
Abstract Cronbach’s alpha is a statistic commonly quoted by authors to demonstrate that tests
and scales that have been constructed or adopted for research projects are fit for purpose.
Cronbach’s alpha is regularly adopted in studies in science education: it was referred to in 69
different papers published in 4 leading science education journals in a single year (2015)—
usually as a measure of reliability. This article explores how this statistic is used in reporting
science education research and what it represents. Authors often cite alpha values with little
commentary to explain why they feel this statistic is relevant and seldom interpret the result for
readers beyond citing an arbitrary threshold for an acceptable value. Those authors who do
offer readers qualitative descriptors interpreting alpha values adopt a diverse and seemingly
arbitrary terminology. More seriously, illustrative examples from the science education liter-
ature demonstrate that alpha may be acceptable even when there are recognised problems with
the scales concerned. Alpha is also sometimes inappropriately used to claim an instrument is
unidimensional. It is argued that a high value of alpha offers limited evidence of the reliability
of a research instrument, and that indeed a very high value may actually be undesirable when
developing a test of scientific knowledge or understanding. Guidance is offered to authors
reporting, and readers evaluating, studies that present Cronbach’s alpha statistic as evidence of
instrument quality.
Keywords Researchmethods.Testdevelopment .Scales.Statistics.Assessingknowledgeand
understanding . Face equivalence
Introduction
Science education research often involves the adoption of existing, or the development of new,
instruments to measure phenomena of interest. In the present paper, two particular types of
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
DOI 10.1007/s11165-016-9602-2
* Keith S. Taber
kst24@cam.ac.uk
1
Science Education Centre, Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge, 184 Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 8PQ, UK
Published online: 7 June 2017
instrument are considered, scales and tests. Scales are here considered to measure constructs in
the affective domain, such as attitudes. Tests are here considered to measure cognitive features
such as knowledge and understanding of science concepts and topics.
When choosing an instrument, or developing a new instrument, for a study, a researcher is
expected to consider the relevance of the instrument to particular research questions (National
Research Council Committee on Scientific Principles for Educational Research, 2002) as well
as the quality of the instrument. Quality may traditionally be understood in terms of such
notions as validity (the extent to which an instrument measures what it claims to measure,
rather than something else) and reliability (the extent to which an instrument can be expected
to give the same measured outcome when measurements are repeated) (Taber, 2013a).
In a physical sciences context, we might expect to be able to test reliability by taking
repeated measurements to see how consistent the readings are. A high reliability does not
ensure accuracy (for example, an ammeter which has not been properly calibrated may give
very consistent repeat readings, without these being accurate) but does provide a basis for
making inferences about changes (an increase in the reading on an ammeter which is poorly
calibrated but has shown to give repeatable readings can be inferred to indicate an increased
current). However, when an instrument does not give reliable readings, it may be difficult to
distinguish genuine changes in what we are seeking to measure from changes in readings that
are an artefact of the unreliability of the instrument.
In educational research, it may be quite difficult to test the reliability of an instrument such
as an attitude scale or a knowledge test by simply undertaking repeated readings because
human beings are constantly changing due to experiences between instrument administrations,
and also because they may undergo changes due to the experience of the measurement process
itself. So, a student may answer a set of questions, and that very activity may set in chain
thinking processes that lead to new insights or further integration of knowledge. A day, week,
or month later, the student may answer the same questions differently for no other reason than
that responding to the original test provided a learning experience.
The present article takes the form of a methodological critique, focused on one
measure commonly associated with instrument reliability in science education research
(Cronbach’s alpha). The genesis of this study was dissatisfaction with the treatment of
Cronbach’s alpha in some papers I was reading in relation to my own scholarship
and—in particular—as a referee or editor. The impression developed was that although
this statistic was often quoted by authors of science education studies submitted for
publication, it was not always made clear what the statistic represented, or why it was
relevant, or why some particular value was (or was not) desirable. This impression was
tested, and reinforced, by looking to see how Cronbach’s alpha was applied in
published studies in the field. An initial informal search suggested these concerns did
not simply reflect the treatment of alpha in a few isolated papers but were more
widespread and led to the identification of examples that illustrated points worthy of
raising within the research community. A more systematic investigation of the use of
the statistic in a sample of science education papers published in leading journals in the
field in 2015 was then undertaken. This paper presents findings from that survey, to
illustrate the extent and nature of the use of Cronbach’s alpha in published reports of
science education in highly regarded journals in the field, as well as exploring identi-
fied issues of concern by discussing examples from the literature consulted.
The focus on science education here is not intended to suggest that studies in this field are
more problematic in this regard than those in other fields (which were not examined for the
1274
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
present study). Rather, this methodological critique has been prepared from within the context
of science education because it is believed that the issues identified will be relevant to others
who engage with research in this field (as authors, as editors and reviewers, and as readers) and
that recommendations could be developed which will be useful to colleagues in the field when
preparing or evaluating research reports. It is hoped that by locating this critique within the
substantive field, and by illustrating points with examples from the science education litera-
ture, the study will be visible and accessible to others engaging with this body of literature.
The present article is organised into three main parts. It begins by exploring current practice
in science education by describing how Cronbach’s alpha is used within published studies in
science education. Some illustrative examples that highlight particular issues relating to
practice in reporting the alpha statistic are explored from studies reporting the development
and/or use of instruments designed to measure affective constructs or aspects of cognition
(such as student knowledge). This offers a context for discussing the nature of Cronbach’s
alpha itself, and the reason this statistic was originally introduced, and so its potential role in
instrument development and evaluation. This then provides a basis for critiquing some
common practises used by authors reporting the statistic in their research reports in science
education. In particular, some assumptions that are commonly explicit or implicit in research
reports —that alpha should be as high as possible and that a high alpha can be taken as a sign
of instrument quality—will be questioned, in particular in relation to the development of
instruments to test science knowledge and understanding. This then leads to some recommen-
dations for good practice for authors regarding how the statistic should be presented in studies
reporting instrument development or application in science education and advice for those
reading science education reports on identifying features of good and more questionable
practice.
The Use of Cronbach’s Alpha in Science Education Studies
It is common to see the reliability of instruments used in published science education studies
framed in terms of a statistic known as Cronbach’s alpha (Cronbach, 1951). Cronbach’s alpha
has been described as ‘one of the most important and pervasive statistics in research involving
test construction and use’ (Cortina, 1993, p. 98) to the extent that its use in research with
multiple-item measurements is considered routine (Schmitt, 1996, p. 350). Alpha is commonly
reported for the development of scales intended to measure attitudes and other affective
constructs. However, the literature also includes reports of the development of tests of student
knowledge and understanding that cite Cronbach’s alpha as an indicator of instrument quality.
The Frequency of Use of Cronbach’s Alpha in Science Education
To give an indication of the extent to which Cronbach’s alpha is used in science education
research, a survey was undertaken of papers published in issues of four prestigious science
education journals during one academic year. The 2015 volume of the journals were surveyed
as this was the most recent year for which a full volume was available. The journals selected
were those most widely considered to be high-status research journals and which routinely
included reports of empirical work across science education. These are International Journal of
Science Education (IJSE, Volume 37, comprising 18 issues), Journal of Research in Science
Teaching (JRST, Volume 52, comprising 10 issues), Research in Science Education (RISE,
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1275
Volume 45, comprising 6 issues—some articles in this volume are cited as 2014 according to
the publisher’s metadata, reflecting their first publication on line) and Science Education (SE,
Volume 99, comprising 6 issues). The choice of these journals was intended to ensure that all
articles considered would have been subjected to rigorous peer review.
The on-line search facility provided by each journal publisher (Taylor & Francis for IJSE;
Wiley for JRST and SE; Springer for RISE) was used to find articles listed as being published in
the 2015 volume that included the word Cronbach in the text, in order to identify articles that
made explicit reference to Cronbach’s alpha. Seventy articles were initially identified, although
one of these did not explicitly refer to the alpha statistic (but appeared in the initial screen as it
included a citation to a paper by Cronbach). There were therefore 69 explicit references to
Cronbach’s alpha in papers published in the four science education journals in their volumes
for 2015.
The figure of 69 explicit references to Cronbach’s alpha likely underestimates the actual level
of reference to this statistic in the volumes surveyed as authors may refer to [Cronbach’s] alpha
values without specifying the specific statistical test being used. For example, one paper in the
IJSE volume surveyed (Bathgate, Crowell, Schunn, Cannady, & Dorph, 2015) made two
references to an unspecified alpha statistic. Bathgate and colleagues describe developing “a
measure of students’ ability to make effective arguments in science” (p.1596) for which “the
overall instrument had acceptable reliability (alpha = .77),” and a “knowledge test administered
before and after the 4-month classroom unit on weather and climate” which comprised “21 items,
alpha = .78” (p.1600). It seems very likely that this statistic is the Cronbach alpha. Similarly, a
paper in the 2015 volume of JRST described a post-test with items “designed expressly for the
study” where they found that “two of the items did not discriminate understanding of the deep
structure as intended, reducing the reliability statistic (Alpha) for the test. We discarded these two
items. The remaining four post-test questions…were fairly reliable, α = 0.70” (Shemwell, Chase,
& Schwartz, 2015, p. 68). Again, it seems likely from the context that the statistic referred to here
is Cronbach’s alpha, although this was not explicitly stated.
As such examples can only be assumed to report the Cronbach alpha (as there are other
statistics labelled alpha), they were not included in the survey, and no attempt was made to
systematically identify such papers in the sampled volumes. It would seem to be good practice
for authors citing statistical results to be unambiguous about the particular statistical tests they
have carried out, rather than leaving readers to infer this from the context. Of the 69 articles
that explicitly referred to Cronbach’s alpha, 64 cited values of alpha, including 61 which
reported values of alpha as new results. These differences arise because some papers men-
tioned alpha in explaining the choices of statistics applied, but did not report values of alpha,
and some papers cited alpha values from research reviewed, but did not report the statistic from
new empirical work reported.
Describing the Significance of Alpha
Authors who report results for Cronbach’s alpha describe or explain the meaning of the alpha
statistic in various ways—and some cite the statistic without any explanation at all. The articles
identified in the 2015 volumes of the four research journals surveyed (IJSE, JRST, RISE, SE)
were examined to see how authors who cited values of alpha (64 articles) described it. The
most common descriptors were (separately or together) reliability or internal consistency.
Twelve articles used both of these terms, including one paper that described alpha in terms
of internal consistency, reliability, and also discriminating power,
1276
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
In this study, Cronbach’s coefficient α was used to calculate the internal consistency
coefficients of the items included in the questionnaire through a pilot study with 42
science teachers. Results of the reliability analysis showed that the items in the six scales
had a satisfactory discriminating power. (Mansour, 2015, p. 1773)
As this quotation shows, authors considering reliability and internal consistency as equiv-
alent may assume that this is understood by readers and does not need to be explicitly stated. In
some cases, the shift between terms was clear enough. So, for example, in a study concerned
with gender differences in motivation and engagement of senior secondary physics students
(Abraham & Barker 2014), alpha is directly linked with both terms: “In preliminary analysis,
we examined the Cronbach’s alpha estimate of internal consistency of each a priori scale…
Specifically, support for the six-factor model requires (a) acceptable reliability for each scale
(i.e. alpha = 0.70 or above)…” (p.63, emphases added). Sometimes, however, such explicit
linking is absent, as in a study exploring biology undergraduates’ conceptions related to
learning and their self-efficacy (Lin, Liang, & Tsai, 2015), which reported on a questionnaire
drawing upon a previously published instrument. Lin and colleagues made explicit references
to Cronbach’s alpha as a reliability coefficient in the context of discussing the source
instrument and the new empirical results. However, it was left to readers to appreciate that
internal consistency was being considered as synonymous to reliability:
For the overall reliability, the Cronbach’s alpha value was .80. The alpha values of the 2
subscales were .88 and .89… the revealed values of skewness (at least less than 2) and
kurtosis (at least less than 7) … suggested normal distribution of the data. The results
indicated the satisfactory level of construct validity and internal consistency of this
modified questionnaire. Also, it was suitable to measure the university students’ con-
ceptions of learning biology. (pp.454–455)
A reader who did not appreciate that the authors were using the two different terms
interchangeably might find it difficult to unpack the logical thread (“overall reliability, the
Cronbach’s alpha value was .80… The results indicated the satisfactory level of…internal
consistency…”) from the wider textual context.
Most (44/64) of the articles reporting results including alpha values did refer to alpha as
reliability—including one exploring perceptions related to global warming that suggested it
should not necessarily be seen a measure of internal consistency as “while Cronbach’s alphas
are the standard value reported for scale reliability, this value tends to underestimate the
internal consistency of scales consisting of fewer than 10 items” (Herman, 2015, p. 8) and
offered mean inter-item correlation values as an alternative measure of internal consistency.
Some of the articles in the sample qualified the term reliability or linked it to some other
descriptor. One article referred to it as interrater reliability (and another paper in the sample
used alpha in that way), one as reliability of separation and two as internal reliability. One
paper equated alpha with both reliability and congruence. One of the papers that described
alpha as reliability implied it related to items fitting on a single scale. Two other papers (that
did not use the terms reliability or internal consistency) did specify that alpha was concerned
with items being on a single scale or unidimensionality (as will be discussed later in this article,
Cronbach’s alpha does not provide evidence of scale unidimensionality.)
One paper that referred to alpha as internal consistency also used the alternative term
coherence (Wild, 2015). This study, that explored chemistry learners’ perceptions of learning
environment and Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) career
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1277
expectations, modified a previously reported instrument. When discussing the previously
published instrument, alpha was described as internal consistency (“Research using the
CLES with American elementary, middle, and high school students has found high internal
consistency (0.93 ≤Cronbach’s α ≤0.94)”, p. 2290), but when discussing the new analysis
undertaken, the alternative term was used (“The perception of a CLE item showed high
coherence (Cronbach’s α = 0.90)”, p. 2290) albeit in a subsection titled BInternal consistency
and factor analyses^.
Alpha was therefore found to be used as an indicator of reliability, interrater reliability,
reliability of separation, internal reliability, internal consistency, congruence, unidimensional-
ity and/or coherence. However, 8 of the 64 articles (i.e. 1 in 8) that cited values for alpha did so
without offering any indication at all of what the statistic signified.
Characterising Values of Cronbach’s Alpha
Many, but not all, of the papers found to cite alpha values in the 2015 volumes of four science
education journals (IJSE, JRST, RISE, SE) offered qualitative interpretations of the signifi-
cance of the values calculated in relation to what was being measured (which, as discussed
above, was usually considered as a form of reliability or internal consistency). Some papers
also offered indications of alpha having a threshold or cut-off as an acceptable, sufficient or
satisfactory level. This was normally seen as ≥0.70 (five instances) or >0.70 (three instances)
although one article more vaguely referred to “the acceptable values of 0.7 or 0.6”
(Griethuijsen et al., 2014).
A wide range of different qualitative descriptors was used by authors to interpret alpha
values calculated. These descriptors are reported here (and represented graphically in Fig. 1)
with the range (except where a descriptor was only applied to a single value in the sample)
representing the highest and lowest values labelled that way in articles surveyed. So, alpha
values were described as excellent (0.93–0.94), strong (0.91–0.93), reliable (0.84–0.90), robust
(0.81), fairly high (0.76–0.95), high (0.73–0.95), good (0.71–0.91), relatively high (0.70–
0.77), slightly low (0.68), reasonable (0.67–0.87), adequate (0.64–0.85), moderate (0.61–
0.65), satisfactory (0.58–0.97), acceptable (0.45–0.98), sufficient (0.45–0.96), not satisfactory
(0.4–0.55) and low (0.11). Figure 1 offers a visual indication of the wide range of values
labelled by some of these descriptors (e.g. acceptable, sufficient) in the sampled studies. This
diverse list of terms suggests that there is no clear consensus on the most appropriate labels to
use to describe the values obtained when calculating alpha. Figure 1 also suggests there is no
clear hierarchy within the range of terms (e.g. high cf. fairly high; not satisfactory overlapping
with sufficient and acceptable) used across different scholars, so that terminology seems to be
somewhat arbitrary.
The common notion of there being a threshold of acceptability for alpha values, if
only as a rule of thumb (Plummer & Tanis Ozcelik, 2015), was not always seen as
implying that lower values of alpha should be taken as indicating an unsatisfactory
instrument. Griethuijsen et al. (2014) reported a cross-national study looking at
student interests in science where “several of the values calculated for Cronbach’s
alpha are below the acceptable values of 0.7 or 0.6” (p.588). For example, an
“interest in school science” factor was based on a subset of five questionnaire items
with Cronbach’s alpha of 0.502 (p.589), and the “interest in domestic activities” factor
was based on a subset of three items with alpha of 0.446 (p.590). The authors
justified continuing with their analysis using the data collected in these
1278
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
administrations by arguing that “slightly increasing the number of items would lead to
acceptable values for Cronbach’s alpha” (p.589).
Examples of Alpha Cited in Measuring Affective Constructs
Many examples could be cited of studies where Cronbach’s alpha is used in characterising
questionnaires aimed at measuring features in the affective domain (attitude, motivation and
the like). Examples are presented here that have been selected to illustrate some key features of
the use of this statistic in research in science education.
Tuan and colleagues (Tuan, Chin, & Shieh, 2005) report a study “to develop a questionnaire
that measures students’ motivation toward science learning” (p.639). The questionnaire
included items relating to six distinct scales—‘self-efficacy, active learning strategies, science
learning value, performance goal, achievement goal and learning environment stimulation’,
considered to reflect different “factors of motivation” (p.643). These distinct factors are
described in the paper for readers. Tuan, Chin and Shieh report that “construct validity was
verified by factor analysis”, and they present a table showing how each of the items in the
questionnaire has a factor loading above 0.4 on one, and only one, of the scales. That is, in a
well-designed instrument with several scales, the response patterns of an item intended to be
part of a particular scale should be more similar to response patterns of the other items on that
scale than the items on the other scales that are intended to be associated with a different
construct or aspect.
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1279
Fig. 1 Qualitative descriptors used for values/ranges of values of Cronbach’s alpha reported in papers in leading
science education journals
The authors used the Cronbach alpha coefficient as a measure of “the internal consistency
of the six scales”. They report that “the Cronbach alpha reliability coefficient for each scale,
using an individual student as the unit of analysis, ranged between 0.87 and 0.70” which they
considered “generally satisfactory” (p.644) (n.b. generally satisfactory is another variation on
those descriptors found in the survey of 2015 studies, shown in Fig. 1). Tuan, Chin and Shieh
also explored the degree of distinctness of the different scales, reporting that “the discrimina-
tive validity ranged from 0.09 to 0.51, showing the independence of each scale and also
somewhat overlapping with other scales” (p.646). That is, they calculated the mean correlation
for each of the scales with the five other scales and obtained (in ascending value) results of
0.09, 0.30, 0.31, 0.32, 0.39 and 0.51. It would be suspect if the correlations between these
scales were very high, as that would suggest that the sets of items making up the different
scales were not measuring different factors. What is of interest for the present discussion
however is that the authors quote a value of Cronbach’s alpha for the instrument as a whole,
again when taking the individual student as the unit of analysis, and this is reported as 0.91
(p.646). That is, the measure used for internal consistency across the whole questionnaire
(0.91) is greater than any of the coefficients (0.70, 0.75, 0.80, 0.81, 0.82, 0.87) obtained for the
six somewhat overlapping scales from which it was composed. This is a point returned to later
in this paper.
There are many other examples of authors quoting high alpha values for multi-construct
scales. In a study exploring self-regulation of biology learning, Eilam and Reiter (2014)
adopted the Learning and Study Strategies Inventory, a 76-item instrument comprising of 10
scales. The authors report Cronbach alpha values for each scale and for the instrument overall,
and again, the overall value is higher than that of the distinct scales (0.91 cf. 0.73, 0.75, 0.76,
0.79, 0.83, 0.84, 0.86, 0.87, 0.89, 0.89, p.716). These values are reported without any
explanation, interpretation or comment, presumably because the authors (and one supposes
the experts who peer reviewed the manuscript for the journal) consider their relevance self-
evident and not requiring commentary.
Heddy and Sinatra (2013) report a study looking at both affect and conceptual change in
learning about evolution. One of the instruments they used in this study was an Evolution
Emotions Survey that they published in full in their paper. The instrument was used to explore
a range of emotions: “enjoyment, hope, pride, anger, anxiety, shame, hopelessness, boredom”
(p.729). Among the items included in the instrument were I enjoy being in class, I am full of
hope, I feel frustrated in class, I feel nervous in class, I am ashamed, I have lost all hope of
understanding this class and I find this class fairly dull, providing face validity at least that the
items in the different scales were indeed eliciting responses based on different emotions. The
authors did not report Cronbach’s alpha for the scales for these distinct emotions, but rather
offered readers the statistic for the overall instrument as being 0.97. Their interpretation of this
statistic was that “reliabilities for the emotions survey were excellent” (p.729). The desirability
of such a high value of alpha, close to the theoretical limit of 1, seems to be assumed, but this
will be questioned later in this article.
Another study that used Cronbach’s alpha in characterising an instrument developed for
measuring affect in science education is “Developing attitude to science scales for use with
children of ages from five to eleven years” (Pell & Jarvis, 2001) which “reports on the
development stages of three attitudes to science and school scales for use with children aged
from 5 to 11 years” (p,847). Pell and Jarvis report that ‘Attitude subscales measure Bliking
school^, Bindependent investigator^, Bscience enthusiasm^, the Bsocial context^ of science and
Bscience as a difficult subject^ with Cronbach Alpha reliabilities for the year groups varying
1280
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
from above 0.8 to below 0.7’ (p.847). That is, in common with many other authors (see
above), Pell and Jarvis consider alpha to reflect the reliability of a scale of instrument.
Of particular interest here is that the alpha value obtained reflects the specific sample tested.
Pell and Jarvis included different age pupils in their study and reported that a subscale they
labelled liking school “is most reliable when measuring the attitudes of the youngest pupils. At
year 1, reliability = 0.83, N = 41, whereas by year 6, reliability has progressively reduced to
r = 0.66, N = 166” (p.853). They argued that some items in their scale were more associated
with being in school by respondents in some age groups than others, such that those items were
able to elicit the desired construct better with younger children. By contrast, Lamb, Akmal and
Petrie (2015) in a study “to investigate content, cognitive and affective outcomes related to
STEM integrated curriculum” (p.410) explain lower reliabilities of an instrument administered
to kindergarten pupils (as compared to second and fifth grade pupils) as due to “the varying
ability of kindergarteners to interpret questions and responses” (p.422). This reflects how
Cronbach’s alpha cannot be seen as a measure of a scale or instrument per se but only of its
application to a particular sample of respondents.
Examples of Alpha Cited in Measuring Cognitive Constructs
Cronbach’s alpha is also widely used by those designing tests of student knowledge
and understanding, again as an indicator of instrument quality. Casanoves, González,
Salvadó, Haro & Novo (2015) report a study of the attitudes towards and knowledge
of biotechnology among Spanish university students’ preparing for teaching. The
knowledge component was a 21-item instrument asking respondents to judge whether
statements were true or false. This instrument was said to measure “knowledge level
of biotechnology and genetics” and it was reported that “the reliability (Cronbach’s
α) of the knowledge questionnaire was .721” (p.2930). In this example then, alpha
was used to offer evidence of reliability of the 21 items collectively in assessing
“knowledge level of biotechnology and genetics” implicitly treated as a unitary
construct.
Other authors similarly suggest or imply that a high value of Cronbach’s alpha is desirable
when a test of knowledge includes items testing across a range of different science concepts.
Yang, Lin, She and Huang (2015, pp. 1572–1573) report using “a two-tier multiple-choice
diagnostic instrument developed to measure the degree of students’ conceptual understanding
in science (Cronbach’s α = 0.81…)” as a measure of prior knowledge across six diverse topics:
“(1) the classification of substances, (2) fire prevention, (3) thermal convection, (4) chemical
reaction rates, (5) sound waves and (6) mass conservation” (p.1571). Howe and colleagues
report using knowledge tests each covering a range of concepts in the forces topic for which
they considered values of Cronbach alpha offered grounds for regarding test scores as lying on
single scale (Howe et al., 2014, p. 173), whilst Mumba and colleagues (Mumba, Mbewe, &
Chabalengula, 2015) reported an alpha value of 0.83 for a wide-ranging conceptual knowledge
test in the topic of light.
Some other studies reporting knowledge assessment instruments in areas of science
recognise that the target knowledge has multiple aspects. One such study is “An analysis of
16–17-year-old students’ understanding of solution chemistry concepts using a two-tier
diagnostic instrument’ (Adadan & Savasci, 2011) which ‘focused on the development of a
two-tier multiple-choice diagnostic instrument, which was designed and then progressively
modified and implemented to assess students’ understanding of solution chemistry concepts”
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1281
(p.513). These authors developed an instrument that (in its final version) comprised 13 items
that explored student understandings of aspects of solution chemistry “in multiple contexts
with multiple modes and levels of representation”. Six aspects of solution chemistry were
represented (p.519):
&
the nature of solutions and dissolving,
&
factors affecting the solubility of solids,
&
factors affecting the solubility of gases,
&
the types of solutions relative to the solubility of a solute,
&
the concentration of solutions, and
&
the electrical conductivity of solutions.
The authors provided information on how they understood each of these aspects.
Adadan and Savasci call upon the Cronbach alpha statistic and relate it to both the terms
reliability and internal consistency:
The reliability of [the Nature of Solutions and Solubility—Diagnostic Instrument] was
represented by using the Cronbach alpha coefficient. Cronbach alpha values of 0.7 or
higher indicate acceptable internal consistency...The reliability coefficients for the con-
tent tier and both tiers were found to be 0.697 and 0.748, respectively (p.524).
In recommending their instrument for classroom use, the authors note that some of the
items were found to be of high difficultly but claim that “the test is robust enough that even
if...any two or three items considered to be difficult...are removed from the test, the Cronbach
alpha reliability would not drop below the acceptable value of 0.70” (p.539). For Adadan and
Savasci then, a critical value of alpha of 0.70 offers evidence of the reliability/internal
consistency of an instrument that explores student understanding of six distinct aspects of a
scientific topic area across different contexts, modes, and levels of representation.
A somewhat similar use was made of Cronbach alpha reliabilities by Arslan, Cigdemoglu
and Moseley (2012), who report a “three-tier diagnostic test to assess pre-service teachers’
misconceptions about global warming, greenhouse effect, ozone layer depletion, and acid rain”
through the development of the atmosphere-related environmental problems diagnostic test
(AREPDiT). Their third tier asked students about their confidence in item responses to
“differentiate a lack of knowledge from a misconception” (p.1667). The authors describe the
development of their instrument and how “after the revision of the first version, the Cronbach
alpha coefficient of the second version increased from 0.60 to 0.74, which can be considered
acceptable according to criterion-referenced tests” (p.1677). However, Arslan and colleagues
did not offer readers any guidance on the sense in which the instrument should be considered
acceptable because of this statistical result.
It was reported above how Tuan, Chin and Shieh used factor analysis to confirm that the
items associated with their different scales in their questionnaire did indeed load upon the
intended scales. Arslan, Cigdemoglu and Moseley however reported that in the case of their
three-tier instrument “although an exploratory factor analysis on pre-service teachers’ total
score was conducted, reasonable factors were not obtained.” They suggested that “this could
be because the items are loosely related to each other and do not measure either a single
atmosphere related environmental concept or the three dimensions (nature, consequences, and
solutions) of [global warming, greenhouse effect, ozone layer depletion, and acid rain]”
(p.1679). So in this study, items that were considered to be “loosely related to each other,”
1282
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
and not to measure understanding of a single concept, collectively gave rise to an alpha value
“considered acceptable”, providing a warrant for the authors to claim “The AREPDiT proved
to be a valid and reliable diagnostic instrument to explore the knowledge and misconceptions
of pre-service teachers” (p.1683).
Another recent study using alpha to characterise an instrument reported a “concep-
tual inventory of natural selection as a tool for measuring Greek university students’
evolution knowledge” (Athanasiou & Mavrikaki, 2013), which set out to “compare
various groups of Greek university students for their level of knowledge of evolution
by means of natural selection" (p.1269). The groups comprised of biology specialists
at different stages of university study (post-graduate, final year undergraduates, other
undergraduates) and non-specialists who either were or were not taking subsidiary
biology courses. The authors here used an existing instrument, the Conceptual
Inventory of Natural Selection (CNIS), originally published in English and translated
it into Greek for use in their local context.
Athanasiou and Mavrikaki noted some problems with the instrument, reporting that “a
principal components analysis revealed problems with the items designed to assess the
concepts of population stability, differential survival and variation inheritable, therefore these
items need to be reconsidered” (p.1262). They suggested that their analysis of how different
items loaded upon different constructs “pose a question about the internal validity of the
CINS” (p.1270). Despite this, the authors also reported that “the reliability of the Greek CINS
was estimated as very good” (p.1269), a judgement which was based upon a value of
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.877 for their complete sample. Values of Cronbach’s alpha were also
quoted for the different groups of students (0.65, 0.78, 0.87, 0.88, 0.91), now described as
offering “estimated coefficients of internal consistency” (p.1269). These were interpreted as
“good” apart from the group with the lowest value (0.65—obtained for those non-biologists
who did not attend any biology courses)—which was said to have “a poor but acceptable
Cronbach’s alpha” (p.1270).
As suggested above, then, the values for Cronbach’s alpha apply to the particular
sample responding on a particular occasion and should not be assumed to be a fixed
feature of the scale or instrument. This is reinforced by a study undertaken to explore
undergraduates’ understandings of acid strength. Bretz and McClary (2014) found that
the alpha value obtained from repeated administrations of their diagnostic instrument
to a group of 52 students shifted from 0.39 to 0.54 over a period of three months.
Taken at face value, their diagnostic instrument—a fixed set of items—became more
reliable, or more internally consistent, over time. Bretz and McClary report that the
“students had three months additional instruction (including concepts about acid
strength) between the pre/post-administrations” (p.214). It seems that the items in
the instrument became more similar in terms of the responses they elicited from these
particular learners after the students had experienced additional formal teaching about
the canonical scientific concepts being tested: something to be both expected and
welcomed (and a finding consistent with Athanasiou and Mavrikaki’s finding that
reliability in their study was lowest for the group of students who had not been
formally taught biology in higher education). A similar finding was reported by
Berger and Hänze (2015) in a study of teaching physics through the jigsaw cooper-
ative learning technique where internal consistency, as measured by alpha, increased
from 0.45 before instruction to 0.60 after teaching. This underlines how the alpha
statistic always relates to a particular administration of an instrument.
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1283
Abraham and Barker (2014) administered their Physics Motivation Questionnaire, a 22-
item instrument “measuring six constructs” (p.62) in the context of a sequence of modules
(waves, electricity, motion, the cosmic engine) studied by year 11 students in Sydney such that
the same items (e.g. “I know I am able to do well in this module”) referred to different module
contexts in different administrations, so that alpha might be expected to shift between
administrations. Five of their six constructs were measured by subscales of three to five items
(the sixth was represented by one item), and a distinct value of alpha was quoted for each
subscale, for each of the modules. So, for example, alpha for the interest value subscale varied
from 0.832 for the waves module to 0.909 for the cosmic engine module. As the sample size
varied between administrations (n = 222–280), the differences in alpha could relate to the
variation in respondents and/or to general shifts in attitude to the subject through the school
year, as well as the module context. Abraham and Barker also cited an estimated value of alpha
for their single item (“I do not want to continue physics to year 12”) subscale of 0.98, although
they offered no indication of how they made the estimate or how alpha for a single-item
subscale should be understood.
Key Findings Regarding the Use of Cronbach’s Alpha in Science Education Studies
Alpha is then widely used by authors in science education to represent the reliability,
or the internal consistency, of an instrument or an instrument scale in relation to a
particular sample or subsample of a population. These terms are often seen as
synonymous in relation to alpha, and a number of alternative terms are also associated
with alpha values cited in science education. A value of around 0.70 or greater is
widely considered desirable (although characterisation of the qualitative merits of
specific values seems highly variable between studies). The examples reviewed here
show that alpha values of 0.7 or above can be achieved even when an instrument is
exploring multiple constructs or testing for several different aspects of knowledge or
understanding. As seen above, acceptable values of alpha may be reported even when
an instrument includes items of high difficulty that few students can correctly answer,
or items that are considered to be only loosely related to each other, or when items are
found to be problematic in terms of their loading on factors associated with the
particular constructs they are intended to elicit (that is, when items may not clearly
belong in the scale or test section they are designated to be part of).
The Nature of the Alpha Statistic
Cronbach’s alpha is then commonly used in studies as an indicator of instrument or
scale reliability or internal consistency. Alpha became widely used after being
discussed by Cronbach (1951) who reasonably suggested that using the label α was
more convenient than repeatedly referring to the “Kuder-Richardson Formula 20”
(p.299).
What Does Alpha Actually Measure?
Cronbach was concerned with having a measure of reliability for a test or instrument which
could be obtained from a single administration given the practical difficulties (referred to
1284
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
earlier) in obtaining test-retest data—and he distinguished the latter as a matter of test stability
(lack of change over time) as opposed to tests like Cronbach’s alpha that offered measures of
equivalence (whether different sets of test items would give the same measurement outcomes).
The approach used to test equivalence was based on dividing the items in an instrument into
two groups, and seeing whether analysis of the two parts gave comparable results.
Clearly, in using such an approach, there are many ways a large set of items could
be divided. Consequently, the level of equivalence found might vary depending upon
how the split is made and so can in practice lead to quite different split-half
coefficients. However, if all possible splits were made (that is, in effect the process
is repeated for each possible split), then it is possible to produce a statistic that
reflects the overall pattern of coefficients. Cronbach’s alpha was such a statistic: a
function of all the split-half coefficients for a test. Cronbach wrote that “if all the
splits for a test were made, the mean of the coefficients obtained would be α”
(p.306). So, alpha reflects the extent to which different subsets of test items would
produce similar measures. Cronbach suggested that alpha “reports how much the test
score depends upon general and group, rather than item specific, factors” (p.320).
Gardner (1995), writing in Research in Science Education about instruments to
measure attitudes to science, discussed how “Cronbach’s alpha is the statistic which is
most widely used today for estimating internal consistency” (p.285), explaining that
“alpha is maximised when every item in a scale shares common variance with at least
some other items in the scale” (p.286, emphasis in original). Gardner highlighted how
when using a ratings scale where a total score was obtained by summing the responses
across items it is important that all the items reflect the same construct. That is, that the
scale needs to be unidimensional to provide an “interpretable” result, as ‘a score obtained
from a measuring scale ought to indicate the Bamount^ of the construct being measured’.
The study of Tuan, Chin and Shieh to measure students’ motivation towards science
learning (discussed earlier) offers an example where an instrument (questionnaire) was
developed with a number (there six) of distinct scales. Following Gardner’s advice, it
would make sense to assign alpha scores on the specific scales (“self-efficacy, active
learning strategies, science learning value, performance goal, achievement goal, and
learning environment stimulation”), but calculating an alpha value across all items to
give an overall measure of internal consistency of the overarching ‘motivation’ instru-
ment is not justified.
It was mentioned above that Tuan, Chin and Shieh obtained a high value of alpha (0.91) for
their overall questionnaire despite it being composed of six discrete scales measuring different
constructs and therefore lacking unidimensionality. The Cronbach alpha calculated across
Tuan, Chin and Shieh’s multi-scale instrument was higher than the values of any of the
individual scales, showing that high value of alpha does not necessarily indicate a high level
of consistency (or equivalence in Cronbach’s term) between the instrument items as a whole.
The same was found in Eilam and Reiter’s study. Given that some authors choose to report
cross-scale results, readers should be aware that the Cronbach alpha statistic is most valuable in
relation to single-construct scales and less informative when reported for instruments measur-
ing several constructs at once (Adams & Wieman, 2010).
The practice of reporting only an overall alpha value when an instrument is comprised of
several discrete scales (as in the Heddy and Sinatra study discussed above) is less useful to
readers. As Gardner pointed out, “a scale may be composed of several clusters of items each
measuring a distinct factor; as long as every item correlates well with some other items, the
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1285
scale will demonstrate internal consistency” (p.286). That is, any combination of different
scales is likely to give a high overall alpha as long as the scales themselves have high internal
consistency. In principle, one could pool sets of scale items intended to elicit (for example)
mathematics confidence, enjoyment of field work, attitude to formal examinations, and
motivation to complete homework, and demonstrate a high overall value of alpha as long as
there are related items within the individual scales.
Gardner bemoaned that many researchers appeared to conflate internal consistency and
unidimensionality and did not appreciate that a high value of alpha did not support an
inference that all the items in an instrument were measuring the same thing. Rather, a high
value of alpha simply meant that every item in the instrument was measuring something
similar to some of the other items. Sijtsma (2009) has more recently made the point more
bluntly: “both very low and very high alpha values can go either with unidimensionality or
multidimensionality of the data” (p.119).
Sijtsma (2009) develops an argument explored in Cronbach’s (1951) seminal paper that
alpha does not offer an accurate value for reliability as understood by psychometricians (but
rather a lower bound, although Cronbach himself had argued in his 1951 paper that alpha was
often a suitable proxy) and suggests that internal consistency is not a notion that has a clear and
agreed meaning. Sijtsma argued that ‘all that alpha can reveal about the Binterrelatedness of the
items^ is their average degree of Binterrelatedness^ provided there are no negative covariances
and keeping in mind that alpha also depends on the number of items in the test’ (p.114, italics
in original). Calculating alpha across multiple scales (where the total number of items is
necessarily higher than in the individual scales) tends to inflate the value obtained. This may be
relevant to why in the Tuan, Chin and Shieh (2005) study discussed earlier, the overall value of
alpha for their instrument exceeded the individual alpha coefficients within the six ‘somewhat
overlapping’ scales from which it was compiled: that is, the measure of internal consistency
was higher across the pooled items from six distinct scales intended to elicit different
constructs than it was within any one of those individually more homogeneous scales.
Mun, Mun and Kim (2015) published an account of their development of an instrument
they call the Scientific Imagination Inventory, where they report alpha values for components
of the instrument as well as the overall instrument. Mun and colleagues identified three
components of scientific imagination (and two sub-dimensions of each, giving six factors
overall), which they labelled as scientific sensitivity (comprising emotional understanding and
the experience of imagination), scientific creatvity (comprising originality and diversity) and
scientific productivity (comprising creation and reproduction and scientific sense of reality).
The authors prepared an initial inventory of 29 items, which was vetted for content validity by
a panel of science educators, before it was administered to a sample of 662 Korean school
pupils.
The responses were examined and various tests were applied to the instrument, including
the use of Cronbach’s alpha, where “Cronbach α scores greater than .70 were considered as
indicative of acceptable reliability… After checking the reliability of each factor using the
Cronbach α coefficient, items that decreased the reliability of each factor were removed”
(pp.2099–2100). Factor analysis allowed six interpretable factors (considered to be the factors
built into the design) to be identified, and items with low loadings on the relevant factors were
removed. This left 20 items in the reduced instrument. Mun and colleagues provide the values
of alpha for the refined instrument at three levels: the six factors, the three components and the
overall instrument. These statistics are compiled here in Table 1. The use of factor analysis to
confirm that items primarily load upon the expected factor suggests that the greatest degree of
1286
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
alignment should be between items within the specific factors. Despite this, alpha is higher for
the scientific sensitivity component overall than separately for its two subordinate factors
(0.67 > 0.572, 0.595). Moreover, “The internal consistency reliabilities using the Cronbach α
coefficient was .79 for all items” (p.2100) and this overall measure of consistency was greater
than that of any of the three components or their individual factors. Indeed, the overall statistic
calculated for all 20 items pooled as if one scale was the only presented value of alpha which
met the criterion of “acceptable reliability” cited by the authors themselves (p.2099).
Mun and colleagues’ value of alpha of 0.79 across their instrument was obtained despite
items not all measuring the same thing and was in part a result of the composite instrument
having more items than its (apparently less reliable) component individual factor subscales. In
summary, Cronbach’s alpha is most valuable for indicating scale reliability in the sense of the
equivalence of items within single-construct scales, but the statistic does not offer any
indication that scales are actually unidimensional (which should be tested by other means).
What Value of Alpha Is Desirable?
In everyday terms, a high value of alpha offers a guard against specific items being
unique in the particular sense of eliciting response patterns unlike any of the other
items (Cortina, 1993). This is a sensible thing to wish to guard against if an
instrument is intended to offer a range of items eliciting responses aligned with the
same construct. Thus, the procedure, referred to above (Mun et al., 2015), of
removing items that are found to reduce overall alpha values. However, that is clearly
not equivalent to suggesting that it is desirable for all items in a scale to elicit
precisely the same pattern of responses as this would imply a scale contains redundant
items.
Cortina (1993) noted over 20 years ago that it was common for authors to assume
that demonstrating that alpha was greater than 0.70 was sufficient to consider no
further scale development was needed, leading to the statistic simply being presented
in studies without further interpretation. This feature was found in some of the science
education papers discussed above. Cortina describes this as an improper use of the
statistic. For one thing, as alpha tends to increase with the size of an instrument
(Cortina, 1993; Schmitt, 1996), it is generally possible to increase alpha to 0.70 by
Table 1 Values of Cronbach’s alpha reported for three levels of dimension of the scientific imagination
inventory (Mun et al., 2015)
Factor
Component
Instrument
Emotional understanding
(4 items)
0.572
Scientific sensitivity
(8 items)
0.67
Scientific imagination inventory
(20 items)
0.79
The experience of imagination
(4 items)
0.595
Diversity
(3 items)
0.598
Scientific creativity
(6 items)
0.55
Originality
(3 items)
0.514
Creation and reproduction
(4 items)
0.634
Scientific productivity
(6 items)
0.62
Scientific sense of reality
(2 items)
0.254
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1287
simply adding more items to a test as long as those items are not completely unlike
the existing items. As was seen above, authors may sometimes simply make the
argument that had they included more items, they would have reached an acceptable
value of alpha as a justification for not considering a value below 0.7 as indicative of
a problem with the instrument (Griethuijsen et al., 2014).
Cronbach (1951) had suggested that a high value of alpha was ‘desirable’ when an
instrument was used to assign a score to an individual, but he argued that the key point should
be that scores obtained when using an instrument had to be interpretable—and this was often
possible without needing very high values of alpha. Although adding more items into an
instrument can increase the value of alpha, Cronbach pointed out that adding additional items
that measure the same thing as the existing items leads to a redundancy that is inefficient. Little
additional useful information is obtained, but the instrument takes longer to administer (and
analyse). From this perspective, Heddy and Sinatra’s (2013) claim (see above) that obtaining an
alpha value of 0.97 for their multi-scale Evolution Emotions Survey represented "excellent"
reliability is less convincing. Schmitt (1996) has suggested that there is no general level (such as
0.70) where alpha becomes acceptable, but rather that instruments with quite a low value of
alpha can still prove useful in some circumstances.
Discussion
It seems then that despite many authors following a rule-of-thumb that alpha should reach 0.70
for an instrument to have an acceptable level of self-consistency, there are limited grounds for
adopting such a heuristic. Moreover, it should not be assumed that a very high value of alpha is
always a good thing. A high value certainly does not imply that an instrument or scale is
unidimensional—and in some cases, a very high value may indicate an inefficient level of
redundancy in items.
One particular issue raised above concerned the quoting of alpha values for overall
instruments that are designed to incorporate several dimensions or scales. Not all papers
reporting instruments include a listing of the final items included, but where authors do include
the full list of items, it is possible for readers to consider for themselves the relationship
between different items in a multi-scale instrument—to make a reader judgement of what
might be called face equivalence, the extent to which items appear to be eliciting the same
underlying knowledge facet, opinion or perception. To illustrate this, Mun, Mun and Kim’s
(2015) account of their development of the Scientific Imagination Inventory (described above)
provides the full list of items in the final version of their instrument. Mun and colleagues
identified three components of scientific imagination (and two sub-dimensions of each, giving
six factors overall) but found that the overall measure of consistency across the full set of
instrument items was greater than that for any of the three components or their individual
factors (see Table 1).
Mun et al., provide their final list of items (pp.2111–2112), and four of these are selected here
to illustrate how a high overall alpha does not necessarily imply that all items are strongly related:
E2. Animals such as dogs and cats are able to feel emotions just like me
E3. I feel as if elements of nature, such as animals or plants, are my friends
D1. I try to find answers as often as possible
D2. When the problem is not easy to solve, I try to find a new way to solve it
1288
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
A reader might well consider that E2 and E3 (both drawn from the emotional understand-
ing factor) seem to be tapping into something similar, a sense of harmony with nature perhaps.
Similarly, D1 and D2 (drawn from the diversity factor) both seem to be tapping a self
perception about attitude to facing problems. It is less clear however that considering animals
and plants as friends (E3) is strongly linked with seeing oneself as a creative problem-solver
(D2) for example. The high value of overall internal consistency of the 20 items reflects how
each item shares variance with at least some other items—so D2 does not have to share a high
level of variance with E3, for example, as long as each of those items do share variance with
some others.
At the outset of the paper, I distinguished between instruments that are intended to measure
affective features such as attitudes and motivation from those exploring cognitive features.
Instruments with an affective focus such as attitude scales play an important role in science
education research and evaluation, and these instruments do need to identify clear constructs
that are being measured, and instrument designers (or adapters) do need to demonstrate that
items on a single scale are indeed measuring the same thing. Alpha is not sufficient for this but
may well be used alongside other tools (such as factor analysis) to characterise such scales (as
seen in some of the examples discussed above). It is at least as important that such scales
measure what they claim to measure (that is, that they are valid) as that they can be shown to
be unidimensional—so construct validity also needs to be demonstrated. As the example of the
Athanasiou and Mavrikaki (2013) study considered above shows, an instrument may be found
to have a high value of alpha, even when other indicators suggest there are problems with the
instrument’s validity.
Alpha Used to Characterise Tests of Broad Knowledge Domains
Cronbach’s alpha is also regularly used in research in science education exploring aspects of
the cognitive domain. Here, one aspect of validity is whether the phrasing of questions and the
scoring of responses is considered to reflect what are judged scientifically acceptable answers
for the student group concerned. Readers can only confirm this for themselves when the full
instrument is available for scrutiny. This is certainly not something to be taken for granted. For
example, a study by Nehring, Nowak, zu Belzen and Tiemann (2015) used a 90-item test (for
which a Cronbach alpha value is reported), exemplified by a single sample question presented
in the journal paper.
This item tells students that “A neutralisation is a chemical reaction in which an
acid and a base react. In this process, the pH becomes neutral…” and asks students to
use this information to determine which “assumption” someone could “prove” when
“Jan and Laura add the same quantity of acid and base in a test tube.” One of the
options is that “the pH becomes neutral” (p.1351). There are a number of points that
might be questioned here. Leaving aside whether scientific enquiry should be said to
Bprove^ anything, it might be quibbled that pH (a number) does not become neutral
but rather indicates whether the substance or mixture tested is neutral (in a way that
is temperature dependent) and also that the notion of “same quantity” is not ex-
plained. The same quantity could imply the same volume or the same mass or the
same number of moles—none of which would necessarily ensure there would be no
unreacted acid or base. Moreover, the question appears to encourage the alternative
conception that neutralisation necessarily leads to a neutral product—something that is
often, but certainly not generally, the case (Schmidt, 1991). A reader whom was not
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1289
convinced about the validity of that item might wonder about the other 89 items that
were not selected as exemplars in the published account.
Accounts of new tests of knowledge and understanding, such as diagnostic instruments in
specific science topics, are often characterised by reporting a value for alpha. Yet, it is not
always clear how authors intend this to be understood or what the statistic actually reflects.
One might pose the question of how we are to understand a construct such as “students’
understanding of solution chemistry concepts” (Adadan & Savasci, 2011) or “knowledge of
evolution” (Athanasiou & Mavrikaki, 2013) or “knowledge level of biotechnology and
genetics” (Casanoves et al., 2015) or “conceptual knowledge of light” (Mumba et al., 2015).
Notions such as knowledge and understanding are ubiquitous in the discourse of science
education, although usually taken-for-granted as part of a shared register of terms describing
mental properties or events that are seldom operationally defined in research (Taber, 2013b).
Yet it would generally be accepted that such research foci as understanding of solution
chemistry concepts, or knowledge of evolution or knowledge of biotechnology and genetics
or conceptual knowledge of light are likely to involve a range of related but somewhat discrete
aspects.
Some studies in science education acknowledge that administration of instruments
genuinely testing a range of distinct knowledge facets should not be expected to give
high alphas. Bretz and McClary (2014) calculated and reported alpha for their
administrations of an instrument used in a study of undergraduates’ understandings
of the concept of acid strength but concluded that “the traditional threshold of 0.7 as
indicative of acceptable reliability is actually a flawed metric when it comes to
diagnostic assessments” (p.216). Berger and Hänze (2015) describe how for the
knowledge test they used in their study of the jigsaw learning method, “the internal
consistency as measured by Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was 0.45 for their pre-test
and 0.60 for the post-test, which we considered acceptable given the limited number
of test items and the broad range of tested knowledge” (p.303). That is, internal
consistency (i.e. item equivalence) was not expected to be high here, because of the
different physics concepts tested within the one instrument. Similarly, Nehring et al.
(2015) report an alpha reliability of 0.55 for a conceptual knowledge test used in a
study of learning about scientific enquiry drawing on a range of chemistry concepts.
They explain this value in terms of how “conceptual knowledge may constitute a non-
coherent latent construct across a multitude of students” (p.1351).
However, other authors present high values of alpha as indicators of quality of conceptual
tests. Mumba and colleagues actually state that the “conceptual knowledge of light” test they
used in their study (where Cronbach’s alpha was 0.83) probes “17 light concepts” (Mumba
et al., 2015, p. 191), and these are quite a diverse set including, inter-alia, reflection, shadow
formation, speed of light, refraction, vision, electromagnetic spectrum, filters, and the trans-
verse nature of waves.
Casanoves et al. (2015) present the 21 items that made up their instrument for assessing
knowledge of biotechnology, for which they reported “reliability (Cronbach’s α) of … .721”
(p.2930). This instrument includes a wide range of items relating to such matters as applica-
tions of microorganisms in biotechnology (“bacteria are used in the elaboration of daily
products (e.g. cheese, vinegar and vitamin C)”, affordances of biotechnology (“through genetic
modification, foods with higher nutritional values can be achieved”), natural products (“the
most powerful toxic substances are naturally occurring”), genetics and disease (“AIDS is a
genetic disease”), hereditary (“children resemble their parents because they share the red blood
1290
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
cells”) and commonality of genetic material across species (“crocodiles have the same genetic
material as ostriches”). Knowledge of biotechnology and genetics is clearly multifaceted, and
the need for 21 items suggests that it was recognised that a measurement of knowledge level of
biotechnology and genetics necessitated probing a number of more specific features of that
knowledge. Despite this, the overall alpha value (here equated with reliability) suggests there is
a fair degree of shared variance between items in the instrument.
Inspection of the items allows the reader to identify pairs of items that might be expected to
elicit similar response patterns in relation to respondent knowledge: for example “Through
genetic modification, foods with higher nutritional values can be achieved” with “It is possible
to change the genetic characteristics of a plant to make it more resistant to a given plague”, (or
“Bacteria are used in the elaboration of daily products (e.g. cheese, vinegar and vitamin C)”
with “A yogurt is a biotechnological product^) (p.2931). Detailing instrument items within
research reports supports readers in interpreting and evaluating those reports. An examination
of the items included in the instrument reported by Casanoves et al. (2015) allows a reader to
see both that a range of aspects of knowledge of biotechnology are being tested, and also that
the instrument includes multiple items to elicit knowledge of specific concepts (such as genetic
modification; food products) within the topic. This latter feature would be expected to lead to
individual items having shared variance with some other items when the instrument is
administered to a student group, providing the basis for a high value of alpha across the
overall instrument.
Misuse of Alpha to Imply Unidimensionality
It seems that despite Gardner’s (1995) warning in this journal that researchers should
not conflate internal consistency and unidimensionality and consider a high value of
alpha as suggesting that the items in an instrument were all measuring the same thing,
reports are still being published in prestige science education journals asking readers
to make just this inference. Indeed, sometimes, the argument may be made explicitly.
In a study exploring the assessment of student-generated graphs in science, Vitale, Lai
and Linn (2015, p. 1438) suggested that “relatively high values of Cronbach’s α (six
items, pre-test: α = 0.70; post-test: α = 0.77) suggest that these items all, at least
partially, measured the same factor^ (emphasis added). Depending on how the authors
intend the qualifier “at least partially”, this claim is either misleading or trivial. In the
context of a study exploring the impact of school chemistry classes organised as
“collaborative participation”, Patchen and Smithenry (2014) refer to how “the extent
to which the grouped items in [a] scale measured the same construct (i.e. internal
consistency) was assessed by calculating a Cronbach’s alpha reliability coefficient”
(emphasis added).
Howe and colleagues (2014) report the development and evaluation of a teaching module in
the topic of forces for 11–12 years olds that covered the themes of balanced and unbalanced
forces, measuring forces, stretching, flotation and density, surface friction, and stopping
distance (p.166). Part of the evaluation of the module concerned the preparation of three
structurally similar knowledge tests that “were specific to the Forces module” (p.168) and
which were administered to the 16 school classes that were taught the module as well as 13
control classes. Despite the range of concepts included in the module and tests, the authors felt
confident in claiming that “Cronbach α (.67 for pre-test, .74 for immediate post-test, .77 for
deferred post-test) provided reasonable grounds for regarding test scores as lying on single
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1291
scales” (p.173, emphasis added). So, published studies in science education may adopt the
questionable assumption that conceptual knowledge across one (or more) school topics should
be considered a single dimension and inappropriately offer a high value of alpha as evidence of
such unidimensionality.
Other studies offer overall values of alpha as grounds for confidence in instruments even
when they are acknowledged to be accessing manifold features of knowledge. Adadan and
Savasci (2011) identified six aspects of solution chemistry in their study—each of which they
described in relation to several features. As their final instrument comprised of 13 items, it is
not obvious that having items that tested for different things (different features of student
understanding)—as might be indicated by a low value of alpha—would reflect a problem with
their instrument. Given that a high value of alpha simply means that every item in an
instrument is measuring something similar to some of the other items, we might sometimes
prefer a wide-ranging test instrument over a highly redundant one with a very high alpha value.
Indeed, in a study such as that of Adadan and Savasci, where 13 items test for students’
understandings of “six aspects of solution chemistry,” each of which is complex in the sense of
being made up of more than a single discrete knowledge feature, in “multiple contexts with
multiple modes and levels of representation” (p.513), we might wonder how to best interpret
an alpha value of approximately 0.70.
A high value of alpha obtained from administering an instrument to a sample of students
could be understood as suggesting that the items are measuring some common factor(s) rather
than unique features associated with individual test items. If redundancy has been deliberately
built into the instrument, this is to be expected. However, in the case of a test of knowledge or
understanding, if items are each meant to test for discrete aspects of understanding, or discrete
knowledge elements, then it would not seem appropriate to consider understanding (e.g. of
solution chemistry) or knowledge (e.g. of evolution) as homogenous constructs. If the topic
being tested is considered to consist of distinct aspects, each presenting students with particular
learning challenges, and separate items have been written to test for these distinct aspects, then
finding that there is a high alpha coefficient across the test may perhaps indicate the test is not
working as we intended.
Cronbach suggested alpha reflects “how much the test score depends upon general
and group, rather than item-specific, factors” (p.320), but in a test of knowledge and/
or understanding, we may wish to include very specific items to test different
knowledge components. In such a situation, a high alpha value may suggest that a
lot of the variance is due to general respondent-related factors (e.g. intelligence, study
diligence, motivation in the subject) and that consequently, the instrument does not
differentiate well between different features of the conceptual material being tested.
This could explain why in Arslan, Cigdemoglu and Moseley’s (2012) study, items that
were considered to be ‘loosely related to each other’, relating to four different concept
areas, collectively gave rise to an alpha value of 0.74.
The argument made here is that whilst there is a logic in seeking a high alpha value for
scales intended to measure foci that are conceptualised as single constructs, where a range of
items are designed to elicit that single construct, it is less clear that the focus of a test of
knowledge and/or understanding in a complex science topic is best conceptualised as a single
coherent construct. In developing instruments of this kind—tests, diagnostic instruments,
concept inventories—researchers should carefully consider whether seeking a high value of
internal consistency in the sense measured by alpha (i.e., equivalence across the set of items) is
actually desirable in terms of their research aims.
1292
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
Conclusion
This study has surveyed how the application of Cronbach’s alpha has been presented in major
science education journals over a single year and has reviewed some illustrative examples of
research where Cronbach’s alpha is reported in studies in science education. The survey of
recent studies (published in well-regarded journals) suggest that alpha is routinely being
quoted, but often without its use being explained or the value quoted being fully interpreted
for readers. The methodological literature cited above highlights known limitations of the use
of alpha, yet it remains common practice in science education to consider alpha reaching the
somewhat arbitrary value of 0.70 as a sufficient measure of reliability or internal consistency of
an instrument. This suggests that the present study could act as a useful critique for colleagues
working in science education and undertaking, evaluating, or looking to be informed by,
studies developing or applying instruments such as scales, concept inventories and tests.
It is not argued here that alpha has no value in science education research nor that alpha should
not be calculated and cited in research reports. However, it is suggested that authors need to do
more than simply present the statistic without further comment. This is especially important in a
field such as science education that is diverse and draws upon a wide range of research traditions
(Taber, 2014). Whilst the reader should always engage with research reports critically and seek to
test the assertions and knowledge claims of authors, it is inevitable that many readers of research
papers will only have limited familiarly with the particular methods used. In an ideal world, all
those working in science education would have a high literacy in statistical methods (as well as in
other complementary approaches) but, given the diversity of the field, there is a responsibility on
authors not to assume that all readers of their research are fully familiar with the strengths and
weaknesses (or even the purposes) of the statistical techniques used.
A research report sets out the case for accepting specified new knowledge claims “by a
careful, logical argument, drawing upon convincing evidence” (Taber 2013a: 320), and
researchers are expected to “provide a coherent and explicit chain of reasoning” (National
Research Council Committee on Scientific Principles for Educational Research, 2002, p. 4).
They are also expected to select methods because of “their appropriateness and effectiveness in
addressing a particular research question” (National Research Council Committee on Scientific
Principles for Educational Research, 2002, p. 3). Where researchers are claiming that a
particular instrument is fit for use in science education, they should then both; (i) select
appropriate techniques to evaluate the instrument that has been developed (or adapted or
adopted), and (ii) provide a clear and explicit argument for why any test statistics quoted
should be considered to demonstrate the instrument is suitable for its intended purpose.
The discussion in this paper leads to the following recommendations:
&
When authors present values of Cronbach’s alpha in their published research, they should
explain what they consider the statistic reflects (e.g. if internal consistency, how do they
understand this) and why they feel this statistic is informative in relation to their research
aims.
&
Authors should interpret the value of alpha reported in the context of their particular study,
taking into account the expected dimensionally of what they are seeking to measure and
the total number of items included in the instrument or scale discussed.
&
Authors should be clear about the limitations of alpha and present it alongside
other complementary statistical measures (such as the outcomes of factor analyses)
where appropriate.
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1293
&
Authors should offer readers sight of the items included in an instrument so they can make
their own judgements of (what I have termed here) face equivalence—to what extent items
within a particular scale or instrument seem to be targeted at the same underlying construct
or knowledge facet.
The latter point also links to demonstrating face validity (e.g. see the comments about the
study by Nehring and colleagues above) as a key feature of a research report in any field
considered scientific is that it should be fully open to critique and detailed enough to iteratively
support further research. The notion of replicability may not apply in educational research in
the strict sense that it does in the physical sciences, as we cannot reproduce the conditions of
previous research, and contextual differences between research samples complicate the
generalisability of findings (Taber, 2014). This was seen, for example, in the study by
Athanasiou and Mavrikaki (2013), where a Greek translation of the original English
Conceptual Inventory of Natural Selection was administered. However, research that seeks
to be considered scientific needs to be reported in sufficient detail to allow others to build on
it—and that clearly requires the availability of full instruments rather than simply reporting
sample items.
This present analysis also suggests some points that readers might use as a checklist when
evaluating studies that cite values of Cronbach’s alpha:
As alpha does not offer any guide to the validity of a scale or instrument, do authors offer
complementary evidence that the scale or instrument measures what it is claimed to
measure?
Are high values of alpha a reflection of redundancy in a scale or instrument where a large
number of items are used when fewer might suffice? (This might be indicated where the
scale or instrument contains large numbers of items but may be better judged by
inspection of the actual items where these are provided.)
As alpha does not offer evidence of dimensionality, do authors who claim that instruments
include components that elicit distinct factors provide evidence of dimensionality (i.e. that
subscales are supported by factor analysis)?
Where subscales are pooled and overall values of alpha reported, does a high overall
value of alpha likely largely reflect the shared variance within the subsidiary subscales
rather than across items between subscales? (Would a pooling of the subscales be
expected to provide a composite set of highly related items if the subscales are intended
to measure distinct constructs?)
Could a high overall alpha value that is quoted for the administration of an instrument
intended to test knowledge and understanding across a science topic or concept area
indicate that the main construct being elicited might be a more generic feature of the
student response to items (e.g. intelligence) rather than indicating that learning across the
particular topic or concept area should be considered as a single dimension?
Alternatively, could a high overall alpha value that is quoted for the administration of an
instrument intended to test knowledge and understanding across a science topic or
concept area indicate that the instrument may not sufficiently test the full range of learning
objectives across the topic?
Clearly, readers will be better placed to judge issues such as these when the full set of items
included in an instrument are available for scrutiny.
1294
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
Whilst many researchers who use alpha may have a nuanced appreciation of its affordances
and limitations, it is important both; (i) to avoid the impression that alpha is sometimes calculated
simply because that is what is routinely done, and (ii) not to ask readers less familiar with the
statistic to take on trust that a quoted value assures instrument quality simply because it reaches an
arbitrary threshold level. Similar considerations should apply in relation to any specialised
research methods applied in studies reported in science education journals. This paper has focused
on Cronbach’s alpha because it is a commonly used technique that is recognised in the method-
ological literature as having major limitations. The recent studies cited here demonstrate that
Cronbach’s alpha continues to be reported in science education research papers; (i) without
commentary, and (ii) when it is not clear that the statistic offers relevant evidence of instrument
quality. There are then particularly strong reasons to ask authors reporting alpha to take care to
explain clearly why they have calculated the value and what the result indicates about their
instrument.
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
1295
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and repro-
duction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Abraham, J., & Barker, K. (2014). Exploring gender difference in motivation, engagement and enrolment
behaviour of senior secondary physics students in new South Wales. Research in Science Education,
45(1), 59–73. doi:10.1007/s11165-014-9413-2.
Adadan, E., & Savasci, F. (2011). An analysis of 16-17-year-old students’ understanding of solution chemistry
concepts using a two-tier diagnostic instrument. International Journal of Science Education, 34(4), 513–
544. doi:10.1080/09500693.2011.636084.
Adams, W. K., & Wieman, C. E. (2010). Development and validation of instruments to measure learning of
expert-like thinking. International Journal of Science Education, 33(9), 1289–1312. doi:10.1080
/09500693.2010.512369.
Arslan, H. O., Cigdemoglu, C., & Moseley, C. (2012). A three-tier diagnostic test to assess pre-service teachers’
misconceptions about global warming, greenhouse effect, ozone layer depletion, and acid rain. International
Journal of Science Education, 34(11), 1667–1686. doi:10.1080/09500693.2012.680618.
Athanasiou, K., & Mavrikaki, E. (2013). Conceptual inventory of natural selection as a tool for measuring Greek
university students’ evolution knowledge: differences between novice and advanced students. International
Journal of Science Education, 36(8), 1262–1285. doi:10.1080/09500693.2013.856529.
Bathgate, M., Crowell, A., Schunn, C., Cannady, M., & Dorph, R. (2015). The learning benefits of being willing
and able to engage in scientific argumentation. International Journal of Science Education, 37(10), 1590–
1612. doi:10.1080/09500693.2015.1045958.
Berger, R., & Hänze, M. (2015). Impact of expert teaching quality on novice academic performance in the jigsaw
cooperative learning method. International Journal of Science Education, 37(2), 294–320. doi:10.1080
/09500693.2014.985757.
Bretz, S. L., & McClary, L. (2014). Students’ understandings of acid strength: how meaningful is reliability when
measuring alternative conceptions? Journal of Chemical Education, 92(2), 212–219.
Casanoves, M., González, Á., Salvadó, Z., Haro, J., & Novo, M. (2015). Knowledge and attitudes towards
biotechnology of elementary education preservice teachers: the first Spanish experience. International
Journal of Science Education, 37(17), 2923–2941. doi:10.1080/09500693.2015.1116718.
Cortina, J. M. (1993). What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory and applications. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 78(1), 98–104. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.78.1.98.
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16(3), 297–334.
doi:10.1007/bf02310555.
Eilam, B., & Reiter, S. (2014). Long-term self-regulation of biology learning using standard junior high school
science curriculum. Science Education, 98(4), 705–737. doi:10.1002/sce.21124.
Gardner, P. L. (1995). Measuring attitudes to science: unidimensionality and internal consistency revisited.
Research in Science Education, 25(3), 283–289. doi:10.1007/bf02357402.
Griethuijsen, R. A. L. F., Eijck, M. W., Haste, H., Brok, P. J., Skinner, N. C., Mansour, N., et al. (2014). Global
patterns in students’ views of science and interest in science. Research in Science Education, 45(4), 581–603.
doi:10.1007/s11165-014-9438-6.
Herman, B. C. (2015). The influence of global warming science views and sociocultural factors on willingness to
mitigate global warming. Science Education, 99(1), 1–38. doi:10.1002/sce.21136.
Howe, C., Ilie, S., Guardia, P., Hofmann, R., Mercer, N., & Riga, F. (2014). Principled improvement in science:
forces and proportional relations in early secondary-school teaching. International Journal of Science
Education, 37(1), 162–184. doi:10.1080/09500693.2014.975168.
Lamb, R., Akmal, T., & Petrie, K. (2015). Development of a cognition-priming model describing learning in a
STEM classroom. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(3), 410–437. doi:10.1002/tea.21200.
Lin, T.-C., Liang, J.-C., & Tsai, C.-C. (2015). Conceptions of memorizing and understanding in learning, and
self-efficacy held by university biology majors. International Journal of Science Education, 37(3), 446–468.
doi:10.1080/09500693.2014.992057.
Mansour, N. (2015). Science teachers’ views and stereotypes of religion, scientists and scientific research: a call
for scientist–science teacher partnerships to promote inquiry-based learning. International Journal of
Science Education, 37(11), 1767–1794. doi:10.1080/09500693.2015.1049575.
Mumba, F., Mbewe, S., & Chabalengula, V. M. (2015). Elementary school teachers’ familiarity, conceptual
knowledge, and interest in light. International Journal of Science Education, 37(2), 185–209. doi:10.1080
/09500693.2014.971906.
Mun, J., Mun, K., & Kim, S.-W. (2015). Exploration of Korean students’ scientific imagination using the
scientific imagination inventory. International Journal of Science Education, 37(13), 2091–2112.
doi:10.1080/09500693.2015.1067380.
National Research Council Committee on Scientific Principles for Educational Research. (2002). Scientific
Research in Education. Washington DC: National Academies Press.
Nehring, A., Nowak, K. H., zu Belzen, A. U., & Tiemann, R. (2015). Predicting students’ skills in the context of
scientific inquiry with cognitive, motivational, and sociodemographic variables. International Journal of
Science Education, 37(9), 1343–1363. doi:10.1080/09500693.2015.1035358.
Patchen, T., & Smithenry, D. W. (2014). More than just chemistry: the impact of a collaborative participant structure on
student perceptions of science. Research in Science Education, 45(1), 75–100. doi:10.1007/s11165-014-9414-1.
Pell, T., & Jarvis, T. (2001). Developing attitude to science scales for use with children of ages from five to eleven
years. International Journal of Science Education, 23(8), 847–862. doi:10.1080/09500690010016111.
Plummer, J. D., & Tanis Ozcelik, A. (2015). Preservice teachers developing coherent inquiry investigations in
elementary astronomy. Science Education, 99(5), 932–957. doi:10.1002/sce.21180.
Schmidt, H.-J. (1991). A label as a hidden persuader: chemists’ neutralization concept. International Journal of
Science Education, 13(4), 459–471.
Schmitt, N. (1996). Uses and abuses of coefficient alpha. Psychological Assessment, 8(4), 350–353. doi:10.1037
/1040-3590.8.4.350.
Shemwell, J. T., Chase, C. C., & Schwartz, D. L. (2015). Seeking the general explanation: a test of inductive activities for
learning and transfer. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(1), 58–83. doi:10.1002/tea.21185.
Sijtsma, K. (2009). On the use, the misuse, and the very limited usefulness of Cronbach’s alpha. Psychometrika,
74(1), 107–120. doi:10.1007/s11336-008-9101-0.
Taber, K. S. (2013a). Classroom-based research and evidence-based practice: an introduction (2nd ed.). London: Sage.
Taber, K. S. (2013b). Modelling learners and learning in science education: developing representations of
concepts, conceptual structure and conceptual change to inform teaching and research. Dordrecht: Springer.
Taber, K. S. (2014). Methodological issues in science education research: a perspective from the philosophy of
science. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International Handbook of Research in History, Philosophy and Science
Teaching (Vol. 3, pp. 1839–1893). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Tuan, H.-L., Chin, C.-C., & Shieh, S.-H. (2005). The development of a questionnaire to measure students’
motivation towards science learning. International Journal of Science Education, 27(6), 639–654.
doi:10.1080/0950069042000323737.
Vitale, J. M., Lai, K., & Linn, M. C. (2015). Taking advantage of automated assessment of student-constructed
graphs in science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(10), 1426–1450. doi:10.1002/tea.21241.
Wild, A. (2015). Relationships between high school chemistry students’ perceptions of a constructivist learning
environment and their STEM career expectations. International Journal of Science Education, 37(14),
2284–2305. doi:10.1080/09500693.2015.1076951.
Yang, W.-T., Lin, Y.-R., She, H.-C., & Huang, K.-Y. (2015). The effects of prior-knowledge and online learning
approaches on students’ inquiry and argumentation abilities. International Journal of Science Education,
37(10), 1564–1589. doi:10.1080/09500693.2015.1045957.
1296
Res Sci Educ (2018) 48:1273–1296
