CiiT International Journal of Digital Image Processing, ISSN 0974 – 9691 (Print) & ISSN 0974 – 9586 (Online) 
Vol. 15, No. 10, October 2011 
 
1 
 
  
Abstract— In the domain of Biometrics, recognition systems 
based on iris, fingerprint or palm print scans etc. are often considered 
more dependable due to extremely low variance in the properties of 
these entities with respect to time. However, over the last decade data 
processing capability of computers has increased manifold, which has 
made real-time video content analysis possible. This shows that the 
need of the hour is a robust and highly automated Face Detection and 
Recognition algorithm with credible accuracy rate. The proposed Face 
Detection and Recognition system using Discrete Wavelet Transform 
(DWT) accepts face frames as input from a database containing 
images from low cost devices such as VGA cameras, webcams or even 
CCTV’s, where image quality is inferior. Face region is then detected 
using properties of L*a*b* color space and only Frontal Face is 
extracted such that all additional background is eliminated. Further, 
this extracted image is converted to grayscale and its dimensions are 
resized to 128 x 128 pixels. DWT is then applied to entire image to 
obtain the coefficients. Recognition is carried out by comparison of the 
DWT coefficients belonging to the test image with those of the 
registered reference image. On comparison, Euclidean distance 
classifier is deployed to validate the test image from the database. 
Accuracy for various levels of DWT Decomposition is obtained and 
hence, compared. 
 
Keywords— discrete wavelet transform, face detection, face 
recognition, person identification.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
face recognition system is essentially an application [1] 
intended to identify or verify a person either from a digital 
image or a video frame obtained from a video source. Although 
other reliable methods of biometric personal identification exist, 
for e.g., fingerprint analysis or iris scans, these methods 
inherently rely on the cooperation of the participants, whereas a 
personal identification system based on analysis of frontal or 
profile images of the face is often effective without the 
participant’s 
cooperation 
or 
intervention. 
Automatic 
identification or verification may be achieved by comparing 
selected facial features from the image and a facial database. 
This technique is typically used in security systems. Given a 
 
Manuscript received September 11, 2011. 
1 D. J. Rajdev is with the Thadomal Shahani Engineering College, Mumbai, 
400002, INDIA (phone: +91-8879100684; e-mail: dj.rajdev@gmail.com). 
2  A. R. Chadha is with the Thadomal Shahani Engineering College, 
Mumbai, 
400002, 
INDIA 
(phone: 
+91-9930556583; 
e-mail: 
aman.x64@gmail.com). 
3 P. P. Vaidya is with the Thadomal Shahani Engineering College, Mumbai, 
400002, INDIA (e-mail: pallavi.p.vaidya@gmail.com). 
4 M. M. Roja is an Associate Professor in the Electronics and 
Telecommunication Engineering Department, Thadomal Shahani Engineering 
College, 400050, INDIA (e-mail: maniroja@yahoo.com). 
large database of images and a photograph, the problem is to 
select from the database a small set of records such that one of 
the image records matched the photograph. The success of the 
method could be measured in terms of the ratio of the answer list 
to the number of records in the database. The recognition 
problem is made difficult by the great variability in head rotation 
and tilt, lighting intensity and angle, facial expression, aging, 
etc. A robust facial recognition system must be able to cope with 
the above factors and yet provide satisfactory accuracy levels. A 
general statement of the problem of machine recognition of 
faces can [2] be formulated as: given a still or video image of a 
scene, identify or verify one or more persons in the scene using a 
stored database of faces. The solution to the problem involves 
segmentation of faces, feature extraction from face regions, 
recognition, or verification. In identification problems, the input 
to the system is an unknown face, and the system reports back 
the determined identity from a database of known individuals, 
whereas in verification problems, the system needs to confirm 
or reject the claimed identity of the input face.  
Some of the various applications of face recognition include 
driving licenses, immigration, national ID, passport, voter 
registration, security application, medical records, personal 
device 
logon, 
desktop 
logon, 
human-robot-interaction, 
human-computer-interaction, smart cards etc. Face recognition 
is such a challenging yet interesting problem that it has 
attracted researchers who have different backgrounds: pattern 
recognition, neural networks, computer vision, and computer 
graphics, hence the literature is vast and diverse. The usage of a 
mixture of techniques makes it difficult to classify these 
systems based on what types of techniques they use for feature 
representation or classification. To have clear categorization, 
the proposed paper follows the holistic approach [2]. 
Specifically, the following techniques are employed for facial 
feature extraction and recognition: 
1) Holistic matching methods: These methods use the whole 
face region as a raw input to the recognition system. One of 
the most widely used representations of the face region is 
Eigenpictures, which is inherently based on principal 
component analysis. 
2) Feature-based matching methods: Generally, in these 
methods, local features such as the eyes, nose and mouth 
are first extracted and their locations and local statistics are 
fed as inputs into a classifier. 
3) Hybrid methods: It uses both local features and whole face 
region to recognize a face. This method could potentially 
offer the better of the two types of methods. 
A robust, low-cost approach to Face Detection 
and Face Recognition 
Divya Jyoti1, Aman Chadha2, Pallavi Vaidya3, and M. Mani Roja4 
A 
CiiT International Journal of Digital Image Processing, ISSN 0974 – 9691 (Print) & ISSN 0974 – 9586 (Online) 
Vol. 15, No. 10, October 2011 
 
2 
 
Most electronic imaging applications often desire and 
require high resolution images. ‘High resolution’ basically 
means that pixel density within an image is high, and therefore 
a HR image can offer more details and subtle transitions that 
may be critical in various applications [19]. For instance, high 
resolution medical images could be very helpful for a doctor to 
make an accurate diagnosis. It may be easy to distinguish an 
object from similar ones using high resolution satellite images, 
and the performance of pattern recognition in computer vision 
can easily be improved if such images are provided. Over the 
past few decades, charge-coupled device (CCD) and CMOS 
image sensors have been widely used to capture digital images. 
Although these sensors are suitable for most imaging 
applications, the current resolution level and consumer price 
will not satisfy the future demand [19]. 
Past studies by researches and scientists that have 
investigated the challenging task of face detection and 
recognition have therefore, typically used high resolution 
images. Moreover, most standard face databases such as the 
MIT-CBCL Face Recognition Database [21], CMU Multi-PIE 
[22], The Yale Face Database [23] etc., that are basically used 
as a standard test data set by researchers to benchmark their 
results, also employ high quality images. 
Results obtained by solutions proposed by researchers are 
therefore, relevant for theoretical understanding of face 
detection and identification in most cases. Practical conditions 
being rarely optimal, a number of factors play an important role 
in hampering system performance. Image degradation, i.e., loss 
of resolution caused mainly by large viewing distances as 
demonstrated in [4], and lack of specialized high resolution 
image capturing equipment such as commercial cameras are the 
underlying factors for poor performance of face detection and 
recognition systems in practical situations. There are two 
paradigms to alleviate this problem, but both have clear 
disadvantages. One option is to use super-resolution algorithms 
to enhance the image as proposed in [20], but as resolution 
decreases, super-resolution becomes more vulnerable to 
environmental variations, and it introduces distortions that 
affect recognition performance. A detailed analysis of 
super-resolution constraints has been presented in [3]. On the 
other hand, it is also possible to match in the low-resolution 
domain by downsampling the training set, but this is 
undesirable because features important for recognition depend 
on high frequency details that are erased by downsampling. 
These features are permanently lost upon performing 
downsampling and cannot be recovered with upsampling [24]. 
The proposed system has been designed keeping in view 
these critical factors and to address such bottlenecks. 
II. IDEA OF THE PROPOSED SOLUTION 
The database consists of a set of face samples of 50 people. 
There are 5 test images and 5 training or reference images.  
Frontal face images are detected and hence, extracted. DWT is 
applied to the entire image so as to obtain the global features 
which include approximate coefficients (low frequency 
coefficients) 
and 
detail 
coefficients 
(high 
frequency 
coefficients). The approximate coefficients thus obtained, are 
stored and the detail coefficients are discarded. Various levels 
of DWT are realized and their corresponding accuracy rates are 
determined. 
A. Frontal Face Image Detection and Extraction 
The face detection problem can be defined as, given an input 
an arbitrary image, which could be a digitized video signal or a 
scanned photograph, determine whether or not there are any 
human faces in the image and if there are, then return a code 
corresponding to their location. Face detection as a computer 
vision task has many applications. It has direct relevance to the 
face recognition problem, because the first and foremost 
important step of an automatic human face recognition system 
is usually identifying and locating the faces in an unknown 
image [5]. 
For our purpose, face detection is actually a face localization 
problem in which the image position of single face has to be 
determined [6]. The goal of our facial feature detection is to 
detect the presence of features, such as eyes, nose, nostrils, 
eyebrow, mouth, lips, ears, etc., with the assumption that there 
is only one face in an image [7]. The system should also be 
robust against human affective states of like happy, sad, 
disgusted etc. The difficulties associated with face detection 
systems due to the variations in image appearance such as pose, 
scale, image rotation and orientation, illumination and facial 
expression make face detection a difficult pattern recognition 
problem. Hence, for face detection following problems need to 
be taken into account [5]:  
1) Size: A face detector should be able to detect faces in 
different sizes. Thus, the scaling factor between the 
reference and the face image under test, needs to be given 
due consideration. 
2) Expressions: The appearance of a face changes 
considerably for different facial expressions and thus, 
makes face detection more difficult.  
3) Pose variation: Face images vary due to relative 
camera-face pose and some facial features such as an eye 
or the nose may become partially or wholly occluded. 
Another source of variation is the distance of the face from 
the camera, changes in which can result in perspective 
distortion. 
4) Lighting and texture variation: Changes in the light source 
in particular can change a face’s appearance can also cause 
a change in its apparent texture. 
5) Presence or absence of structural components: Facial 
features such as beards, moustaches and glasses may or 
may not be present. And also there may be variability 
among these components including shape, colour and size. 
The proposed system employs global feature matching for 
face recognition. However, all computation takes place only on 
the frontal face, by eliminating the hair and background as these 
may vary from one image to another. All systems therefore 
need frontal face extraction. One approach to achieve the 
aforementioned is by manually cropping the test image for 
required region or by precisely aligning the user's face with the 
camera before the test sample is clicked. Both these methods 
CiiT International Journal of Digital Image Processing, ISSN 0974 – 9691 (Print) & ISSN 0974 – 9586 (Online) 
Vol. 15, No. 10, October 2011 
 
3 
 
may introduce a high degree of human error and so they have 
been avoided. Instead, automated Frontal Face Detection and 
Extraction is put to use. Therefore, a robust automatic face 
recognition system should be capable of handling the above 
problem with no need for human intervention. Thus, it is 
practical and advantageous to realize automatic face detection 
in a functional face recognition system. Commonly used 
methods for skin detection include Gabor filters, neural 
networks and template matching. 
It has been proved that Gabor filters give optimum output for 
a wide range of variations in the test image with respect to user 
image, but it is the most time intensive procedure [8]. 
Moreover, it is unlikely that the test image would be severely 
out of sync for on the spot face recognition, so this method is 
not used. Most neural-network based algorithms [18],[19] are 
tedious and require training samples for different skin types 
which add to the already vast reference image database; hence, 
even this does not fit the program's requirements. Even 
template matching has severe drawbacks, including high 
computational cost [10] and fails to work as expected when the 
user's face is positioned at an angle in the test image. 
After considering all the above factors, a classical 
appearance based methodology is applied to extract Frontal 
face. The default sRGB colour space is transformed to L*a*b* 
gamut, because L*a*b* separates intensity from a and b colour 
components [11]. L*a*b* colour is designed to approximate 
human vision in contrast to the RGB and CMYK colour 
models. It aspires to perceptual uniformity, and its L component 
closely matches human perception of lightness. It can thus be 
used to make accurate colour balance corrections by modifying 
output curves in the a and b components, or to adjust the 
lightness contrast using the L component. In RGB or CMYK 
spaces, which model the output of physical devices rather than 
human visual perception, these transformations can only be 
done with the help of appropriate blend modes in the editing 
application [10]. This distinction makes L*a*b* space more 
perceptually uniform as compared to sRGB and thus 
identifying tones, and not just a single colour, can be 
accomplished using L*a*b* space.  
Fig. 1 shows the RGB colour model (B) relating to the 
CMYK model (C). The larger gamut of L*a*b* (A) gives more 
of a spectrum to work with, thus making the gamut of the 
device the only limitation. 
 
Tone identification is applied to detect skin by calculating 
the gray threshold of a and b colour components and then 
converting the image to pure black and white (BW) using the 
obtained threshold. Thus, RGB colour space can separate out 
only specific pigments, but L*a*b* space can separate out 
tones. Fig. 2 shows skin color differentiation in the form of 
white color using L*a*b* space whereas Fig. 4 shows no such 
differentiation using RGB. The extracted frontal face has been 
shown in Fig. 3. 
 
 
 
There is higher probability of skin surface being the lighter 
part of the image as compared to the gray threshold [12], This 
may happen due to illumination and natural skin colour (in 
most cultures), so, pure white regions in the black and white 
image correspond to skin. It is assumed that face will have at 
least one hole, i.e., a small patch of absolute black due to eyes, 
chin, dimples etc. [11] and on the basis of presence of holes 
frontal face is separated from other skin surfaces like hands. A 
bounding box is created around the Frontal Face and after 
cropping the excess area, frontal face extraction is complete.  
 
The above technique has been tested extensively on images 
obtained from standalone VGA cameras, webcams and camera 
equipped mobile devices having a resolution of 640 × 480. 
Even for resolutions as low as 320 × 200, where the test image 
is poorly illuminated or extremely grainy, the algorithm was 
able to successfully extract frontal face from test images. Thus, 
the proposed system is robust enough to achieve desired result 
even when low cost equipment like CCTV's and low resolution 
webcams are used. Also, since equipment with inferior picture 
quality like CCTV's and low resolution webcams are used, the 
 
 
Fig. 1. RGB, CMYK and L*a*b* Colour Model 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Reference image (left), image in black and white a plane 
(middle) and image in black and white b plane (right) 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Image in L*a*b* color space (left), frontal face extracted 
image (middle) and grayscale resized image (right) 
 
Fig. 4. B&W image of red color space (left), B&W image of green 
color space (middle) and B&W image of blue color space (right) 
CiiT International Journal of Digital Image Processing, ISSN 0974 – 9691 (Print) & ISSN 0974 – 9586 (Online) 
Vol. 15, No. 10, October 2011 
 
4 
 
algorithm works as expected and hence can be called a low-cost 
approach to face detection. The extracted frontal face image is 
then fed as an input to the DWT-based face recognition process. 
B. Normalization 
Since the facial images are captured at different instants of 
the day or on different days, the intensity for each image may 
exhibit variations. To avoid these light intensity variations, the 
test images are normalized so as to have an average intensity 
value with respect to the registered image. The average 
intensity value of the registered images is calculated as 
summation of all pixel values divided by the total number of 
pixels. Similarly, average intensity value of the test image is 
calculated. The normalization value is calculated as:  
 
Normalization 
Value 
=  
image
 test 
of
 
 value
Average
image
 
reference
 
of
 
 value
Average
 
(1) 
 
This value is multiplied with each pixel of the test image. 
Thus we get a normalized image having an average intensity 
with respect to that of the registered image. Fig. 5 shows the test 
image and the corresponding normalized image. 
 
C. Discrete Wavelet Transform 
DWT [13] is a transform which provides the time-frequency 
representation. Often a particular spectral component occurring 
at any instant is of particular interest [14]. In these cases it may 
be very beneficial to know the time intervals these particular 
spectral components occur. For example, in EEGs, the latency 
of an event-related potential is of particular interest. DWT is 
capable of providing the time and frequency information 
simultaneously, hence giving a time-frequency representation 
of the signal. In numerical analysis and functional analysis, 
DWT is any wavelet transform for which the wavelets are 
discretely sampled. In DWT, an image can be analyzed by 
passing it through an analysis filter bank followed by 
decimation operation. The analysis filter consists of a low pass 
and high pass filter at each decomposition stage. When the 
signal passes through filters, it splits into two bands. The low 
pass filter which corresponds to an averaging operation, 
extracts the coarse information of the signal. The high pass 
filter which corresponds to a differencing operation, extracts 
the detail information of the signal. Fig. 6 shows the filtering 
operation of DWT. 
 
A two dimensional transform is accomplished by performing 
two separate one dimensional transforms. First the image is 
filtered along the row and decimated by two. It is then followed 
by filtering the sub image along the column and decimated by 
two. This operation splits the image into four bands namely LL, 
LH, HL and HH respectively. Further decompositions can be 
achieved by acting upon the LL sub band successively and the 
resultant image is split into multiple bands. For representational 
purpose, Level 2 decomposition of the normalized test image 
Fig. 5, is shown in Fig. 7.  
 
At each level in the above diagram, the frontal face image is 
decomposed into low and high frequencies. Due to the 
decomposition process, the input signal must be a multiple of 
2n where n is the number of levels. The size of the input image 
at different levels of decomposition is illustrated in Fig. 8. 
 
The first DWT was invented by the Hungarian 
mathematician Alfréd Haar. The Haar wavelet [15] is the first 
 
    
 
Fig. 5. Test Image and Normalized Image 
 
 
Fig. 6. DWT filtering operation 
 
 
Fig. 7. Level 2 DWT decomposition 
 
 
Fig. 8. Size of the image at different levels of DWT decomposition 
CiiT International Journal of Digital Image Processing, ISSN 0974 – 9691 (Print) & ISSN 0974 – 9586 (Online) 
Vol. 15, No. 10, October 2011 
 
5 
 
known wavelet and was proposed in 1909 by Alfred Haar. The 
term wavelet was coined much later. The Haar wavelet is also 
the simplest possible wavelet. Wavelets are mathematical 
functions developed for the purpose of sorting data by 
frequency. Translated data can then be sorted at a resolution 
which matches its scale. Studying data at different levels allows 
for the development of a more complete picture. Both small 
features and large features are discernable because they are 
studied separately. Unlike the Discrete Cosine Transform 
(DCT), the wavelet transform is not Fourier-based and hence, 
does a better job of handling discontinuities in data [16]. 
For an input represented by a list of 2n numbers, the Haar 
wavelet transform may be considered to simply pair up input 
values, storing the difference and passing the sum. This process 
is repeated recursively, pairing up the sums to provide the next 
scale, finally resulting in 2n − 1 differences and one final sum. 
Each step in the forward Haar transform calculates a set of 
wavelet coefficients and a set of averages. If a data set s0, s1,   
sN-1 contains N elements; there will be N/2 averages and N/2 
coefficient values. The averages are stored in the lower half of 
the N element array and the coefficients are stored in the upper 
half. The averages become the input for the next step in the 
wavelet calculation, where for iteration i+1, Ni+1 = Ni/2. The 
Haar wavelet operates on data by calculating the sums and 
differences of adjacent elements. The Haar equations to 
calculate an average (ai) and a wavelet coefficient (ci) from an 
odd and even element in the data set can be given as: 
 
2
)
(
1
+
+
=
i
i
i
S
S
a
 
(2) 
2
)
(
1
+
−
=
i
i
i
S
S
c
 
(3) 
 
In wavelet terminology, the Haar average is calculated by 
the scaling function while the coefficient is calculated by the 
wavelet function. 
D. Inverse Discrete Wavelet Transform 
The data input to the forward transform can be perfectly 
reconstructed using the following equations:  
 
i
i
i
c
a
S
+
=
 
(4) 
i
i
i
c
a
S
−
=
 
(5) 
 
After applying DWT, we take approximate coefficients, i.e., 
output coefficients of low pass filters. High pass coefficients 
are discarded since they provide detail information which 
serves no practical use for our application. Various levels of 
DWT are used to reduce the number of coefficients. 
III. IMPLEMENTATION STEPS 
The image size used in the project work is 128 × 128 pixels. 
On applying the wavelet transform, the image is divided into 
approximate coefficients and detail coefficients. Level 1 yields 
the number of approximate coefficients as 64 × 64 = 4096. The 
approximate coefficients (low frequency coefficients) are 
stored and the detail coefficients (high frequency coefficients) 
are discarded. These approximate coefficients are used as 
inputs to the next level. Level 2 yields the number of 
approximate coefficients as 32 × 32 = 1024. These steps are 
repeated until an improvement in the recognition rate is 
observed. At each level the detail coefficients are neglected and 
the approximate coefficients are used as inputs to the next level. 
These approximate coefficients of input image and registered 
image are extracted. Each set coefficients belonging to the test 
image is compared with those of the registered image by taking 
the Euclidean distance and the recognition rate is calculated. 
Table 1 shows the comparison carried out at each level and its 
recognition rate. 
 
Upon inspecting the results obtained, we can infer that Level 
3 offers better performance in comparison to other levels. 
Hence the images are subjected to decomposition only up to 
Level 3.  
IV. FUTURE WORK 
The proposed face detection algorithm is time-efficient, i.e., 
having an execution speed of less than 1.75 seconds on an Intel 
Core 2 Duo 2.2 GHz processor. Due to its speed and robustness, 
it can further be extended for real time face detection and 
identification in video systems. Also, the proposed face 
recognition method can be coupled with recognition using local 
features, thus leading to an improvement in accuracy. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The proposed face detection and extraction scheme was able 
to successfully extract the frontal face for poor resolutions as 
low as 320 × 200, even when the original image was poorly 
illuminated or extremely grainy. Thus, images obtained from 
low cost equipment like CCTV's and low resolution webcams 
could be processed by the algorithm. 
For face recognition, the recognition rate for global features 
using various levels of DWT was calculated. Generally, the 
recognition rate was found to improve upon normalization. 
Level 3 DWT Decomposition gives a superior recognition rate 
as compared to other decomposition levels. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Hafed, “Face Recognition Using DCT”, International Journal of 
Computer Vision, 2001, pp. 167-188. 
[2] W. Zhao, R. Chellappa, “Face Recognition: A Literature Survey”, ACM 
Computing Surveys, Vol.35, No.4, December 2003, pp. 399-458, p.  9. 
 
TABLE I 
COMPARISON OF VARIOUS LEVELS OF DWT 
Levels 
Coefficients 
Recognition Rate 
without normalized 
image 
Recognition Rate  
with normalized  
image 
Level 1 
4096 
85.1% 
91.4% 
Level 2 
1024 
91.4% 
91.4% 
Level 3 
256 
93.6% 
95.7% 
Level 4 
64 
89% 
93.6% 
Level 5 
16 
87.6% 
93.6% 
 
CiiT International Journal of Digital Image Processing, ISSN 0974 – 9691 (Print) & ISSN 0974 – 9586 (Online) 
Vol. 15, No. 10, October 2011 
 
6 
 
[3] S. Baker, T. Kanade, "Limits on super-resolution and how to break them," 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Vol. 
24, No. 9, pp. 1167-1183, September 2002. 
[4] A. Braun, I. Jarudi and P. Sinha, “Face Recognition as a Function of 
Image Resolution and Viewing Distance,” Journal of Vision, September 
23, 2011, Vol. 11 No. 11, Article 666. 
[5] L. S. Sayana, M. Tech Dissertation, Face Detection, Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT) Bombay, p. 5, pp. 10-15. 
[6] C. Schneider, N. Esau, L. Kleinjohann, B. Kleinjohann, "Feature based 
Face Localization and Recognition on Mobile Devices," Intl. Conf. on 
Control, Automation, Robotics and Vision, Dec. 2006, pp. 1-6. 
[7] L. V. Praseeda, S. Kumar, D. S. Vidyadharan, “Face detection and 
localization of facial features in still and video images”, IEEE Intl.  Conf. 
on Emerging Trends in Engineering and Technology, 2008,pp.1-2. 
[8] K. Chung, S. C. Kee, S. R. Kim, "Face Recognition Using Principal 
Component Analysis of Gabor Filter Responses,” International 
Workshop on Recognition, Analysis, and Tracking of Faces and Gestures 
in Real-Time Systems,  1999, p. 53. 
[9] T. Kawanishi, T. Kurozumi, K. Kashino, S. Takagi, "A Fast Template 
Matching Algorithm with Adaptive Skipping Using Inner-Subtemplates' 
Distances," Vol. 3, 17th International Conference on Pattern 
Recognition, 2004, pp. 654-65. 
[10] D. Margulis, Photoshop Lab Colour: The Canyon Conundrum and Other 
Adventures in the Most Powerful Colourspace, Pearson Education. ISBN 
0321356780, 2006. 
[11] J. Cai, A. Goshtasby, and C. Yu, “Detecting human faces in colour 
images,” Image and Vision Computing, Vol. 18, No. 1, 1999, pp. 63-75. 
[12] Singh, D. Garg, Soft computing, Allied Publishers, 2005, p. 222. 
[13] S. Jayaraman, S. Esakkirajan, T. Veerakumar, Digital Image Processing, 
Mc Graw Hill, 2008. 
[14] S. Assegie, M.S. thesis, Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, Purdue University, Efficient and Secure Image and Video 
Processing and Transmission in Wireless Sensor Networks, pp. 5-7. 
[15] P. Goyal, “NUC algorithm by calculating the corresponding statistics of 
the decomposed signal” , International Journal on Computer Science and 
Technology  (IJCST),  Vol. 1, Issue 2, pp. 1-2, December 2010 . 
[16] Y. Ma, C. Liu, H. Sun, “A Simple Transform Method in the Field of 
Image Processing”, Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, 2006,  pp. 1-2. 
[17] H. A. Rowley, S. Baluja and T. Kanade, "Neural network-based face 
detection," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 23-38, January 1998. 
[18] P. Latha, L. Ganesan and S. Annadurai, “Face Recognition Using Neural 
Networks,” Signal Processing: An International Journal (SPIJ), Volume: 
3   Issue: 5, pp. 153-160. 
[19] S. Park, M. Park and M. Kang, “Super-resolution image reconstruction: a 
technical overview,” Signal Processing Magazine, pp. 21-36, May 2003. 
[20] P. Hennings-Yeomans, S. Baker, and B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar, 
“Recognition of Low-Resolution Faces Using Multiple Still Images and 
Multiple Cameras,” Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference 
on Biometrics: Theory, Systems, and Applications, pp. 1-6, September 
2008. 
[21] MIT-CBCL Face Recognition Database, Center for Biological & 
Computational Learning (CBCL), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Available: http://cbcl.mit.edu/software-datasets/heisele/facerecognition 
-database.html, July 2011. 
[22] Multi-PIE 
Database, 
Carnegie 
Mellon 
University, 
Available: 
http://www.multipie.org, July 2011. 
[23] The Yale Face Database, Department of Computer Science, Yale 
University, 
Available: 
http://cvc.yale.edu/projects/yalefacesB/ 
yalefacesB.html, June 2011. 
[24] T. Frajka, K. Zeger, “Downsampling dependent upsampling of images,” 
Signal Processing: Image Communication, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 257-265, 
March 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Divya P. Jyoti (M’2008) was born in Bhopal (M.P.) in 
India on April 24, 1990. She is currently pursuing her 
undergraduate 
studies 
in 
the 
Electronics 
and 
Telecommunication Engineering discipline at Thadomal 
Shahani Engineering College, Mumbai. Her fields of 
interest include Image Processing, and Human-Computer 
Interaction. She has 4 papers in International Conferences 
and Journals to her credit. 
 
Aman R. Chadha (M’2008) was born in Mumbai (M.H.) 
in India on November 22, 1990. He is currently pursuing 
his undergraduate studies in the Electronics and 
Telecommunication Engineering discipline at Thadomal 
Shahani Engineering College, Mumbai. His special fields 
of interest include Image Processing, Computer Vision 
(particularly, Pattern Recognition) and Embedded Systems. 
He has 4 papers in International Conferences and Journals 
to his credit. 
 
Pallavi P. Vaidya (M’2006) was born in Mumbai (M.H.) 
in India on March 18, 1985. She graduated with a B.E. in 
Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering from 
Maharashtra Institute of Technology (M.I.T.), Pune in 
2006, and completed her post-graduation (M.E.) in 
Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering from 
Thadomal Shahani Engineering College (TSEC), Mumbai 
University in 2008. She is currently working as a Senior 
Engineer at a premier shipyard construction firm. Her special fields of interest 
include Image Processing and Biometrics.  
 
 
M. Mani Roja (M’1990) was born in Tirunelveli (T.N.) in 
India on June 19, 1969. She has received B.E. in 
Electronics & Communication Engineering from GCE 
Tirunelveli, Madurai Kamraj University in 1990, and M.E. 
in Electronics from Mumbai University in 2002. Her 
employment experience includes 21 years as an 
educationist at Thadomal Shahani Engineering College 
(TSEC), Mumbai University. She holds the post of an Associate Professor in 
TSEC. Her special fields of interest include Image Processing and Data 
Encryption. She has over 20 papers in National / International Conferences and 
Journals to her credit. She is a member of IETE, ISTE, IACSIT and ACM. 
 
