Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications
and Challenges
MADHURA JOSHI∗and ANKIT PAL∗, Saama AI Research, India
MALAIKANNAN SANKARASUBBU, Saama AI Research, India
Federated learning is the process of developing machine learning models over datasets distributed across data centers such as
hospitals, clinical research labs, and mobile devices while preventing data leakage. This survey examines previous research
and studies on federated learning in the healthcare sector across a range of use cases and applications. Our survey shows
what challenges, methods, and applications a practitioner should be aware of in the topic of federated learning. This paper
aims to lay out existing research and list the possibilities of federated learning for healthcare industries.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy; • Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: federated learning, GDPR, transfer learning
ACM Reference Format:
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. 2022. Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline,
Applications and Challenges. 1, 1 (November 2022), 38 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3533708
1
INTRODUCTION
In the last few years, digital healthcare data has grown significantly. At the same time, recent breakthroughs in
deep learning (DL) have been used in a variety of current medical data processes, including automatic disease
diagnosis [74, 93], classification, biomedical data analysis, Question Answering in the medical domain [85] and
segmentation [69, 78]. These methods hold immense promise and innovation in this field. In the coming future,
the advancement of these methods will refine health care systems and improve medical practices worldwide.
Diagnostic tools, machine learning (ML) based healthcare solutions, and models must be exposed to a wide
variety of cases and data that cover a full range of possible anatomies to capture more informative patterns in
the medical data. It is well known that data from a single source can be significantly biased by the equipment,
demographics, and acquisition protocol. Therefore, training a model on data from a single source would skew its
prediction performance towards the population. Moreover, it is computationally expensive and time-consuming.
Training models in a parallelized manner [30] and within small batches can mitigate a few of these challenges.
However, though this approach addresses computation challenges, it does not necessarily preserve the privacy of
data. Clinical research often involves studies from a large amount of data collected from various sources. Health
institutions, individuals, insurance companies, and the pharmaceutical industry all have access to medical data.
Furthermore, each institution may be linked to a unique collection of stakeholders. These data are often sensitive
and cannot be aggregated or accessed.
∗Both authors equally contributed to this research.
Authors’ addresses: Madhura Joshi, m.joshi@saama.com; Ankit Pal, ankit.pal@saama.com, Saama AI Research, Chennai, India; Malaikannan
Sankarasubbu, Saama AI Research, Chennai, India, malaikannan.sankarasubbu@saama.com.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2022/11-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3533708
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
arXiv:2211.07893v2  [cs.LG]  19 Nov 2022
2
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Access to a large amount of high-quality medical data is possibly the most crucial factor for enhancing Machine
Learning (ML) applications in the healthcare domain. However, security and privacy issues of healthcare data
have raised broad ethical and legal concerns in recent years, given the sensitive nature of health information [1].
The assembly and transmission of these datasets are ethically and legally required to protect patient privacy.
Most healthcare centers, laws at the country level, and regulatory bodies, e.g., the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), have passed new laws
that control sharing data while preserving user security and privacy[71, 128]. Moreover, information and control
about medical data storage, transmission, and usage are central to patient rights.
The sensitive and distributed nature of EHR (Electronic Health Records) in real-world scenarios simulates
a need for an effective mechanism to learn from data residing in health-related institutions, hospitals while
accounting for data privacy. This motivates us to examine the potential and value of federated learning for the
healthcare domain. Federated Learning is an advanced distributed learning technique that leverages datasets
from various universities without explicitly centralizing or sharing the training data. [68, 127].
Federated learning provides many advantages as compared to centralized learning. It enables training a global
model from distributed data. This method also focuses on preserving data privacy by only sharing mathematical
parameters and metadata while keeping the actual data as secure as possible and preventing attacks and tracebacks.
The global ML model is distributed to each client site, where an instance is trained locally. The updates from
locally trained instances are then aggregated at regular intervals to improve the global model. The updated
global model is then sent back to the local devices, where the learning continues. These steps are repeated
until a particular convergence threshold is satisfied or lasts for a long time to improve the deep learning model
continuously.
The parameters and metadata sharing depend on many factors such as use cases, data management and
regulation, business agreement and protection, pipeline, and infrastructure. In this article, we provide an overview
of the federated learning approach in the healthcare domain. Our contribution is as follows
• We demonstrate the components of the federated learning setup and discuss the communication architecture
and building blocks of a federated learning system.
• We examine the various challenges that a federated learning setup faces in terms of privacy, data, and
communication in the healthcare system.
• We survey existing works on federated learning in the health sector and propose a comprehensive list of
applications classified into prognosis, diagnosis, and clinical workflow.
The structure of the paper is as follows; the first section describes the components of a federated learning setup
as well as a federated learning pipeline. Section 2 discusses the challenges and concerns of federated learning in
the healthcare area. Section 3 concludes with a study of federated learning applications in the health care area
and the tools required for implementation.
2
PIPELINE
2.1
Architecture of Communication
2.1.1
Centralized. Centralized federated learning architecture is the most commonly used architecture. In this
setting, data flows in asymmetric nature. A central server is responsible for aggregating the information (e.g.,
local models) from the data owners, coordinating with all the participating client devices, and sending back
the model updates. Client devices usually communicate only with the server; hence the server acts as a system
bottleneck. However, Single-point failure is one of the drawbacks in a centralized setting.
The following is the architecture of centralized federated learning: first, a global model is sent to client devices.
Second, the global model is being updated with client data. Third, the revised model is sent back to the server.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
3
Finally, local models are averaged on the server to create a new global model. Furthermore, this process is repeated.
The architecture of centralized federated learning is shown in figure 1.
Google uses the centralized architecture design in their Android keyboard setting. The central server collects
the local model information from users’ mobile devices and updates the global model, and later the updates are
sent back to the users for inferences. FedAvg is one such example of a centralized framework[77].
 Server sends global model to selected clients
 Clients update the local model with local data
 Send updated local models to the server
 Update the main model 
Hospital 1
Server
Hospital 2
Hospital 3
4
4
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
Fig. 1. Illustration of centralized architecture in federated learning
2.1.2
Decentralized. In the decentralized, federated learning architecture, the client devices can communicate to
train a global model and update it directly without any central server. A decentralized setup prevents the single
point failure issue. SimFL is a federated, decentralized framework [68].
The following is the architecture of decentralized, federated learning: first, the local gradients are updated.
Second, these gradients are sent to selected parties. Third, the model is updated with local data and gradients.
Lastly, the updated model is sent to other parties, and the process continues. The architecture of decentralized,
federated learning is shown in figure 2. This method is usually preferred because it involves exchanging of local
models which are aggregations of large quantity of data. However, decentralized federated learning works on the
concept of mutual trust between the users which leads to few drawbacks.The question arises when one has to use
DFL in a single sided trust environment. A decentralized learning algorithm called Online Push Sum (OPS)[47]
addresses this challenge.It involves a rigorous regret analysis, tested and compared with other algorithms like
Decentralized Online Gradient (DOG) and Centralized Online Gradient (COG).
Blockchain is an excellent example of a decentralized platform [134]. Another example of a similar design is
the decentralized cancer diagnostic system amongst hospitals/medical institutions. Each hospital distributes the
local model that has been trained with patient data and acquires the global model for future diagnosis [99].
2.2
Scale of Federated Learning system
2.2.1
Cross-Silo. In a Cross-Silo federated learning setting, small numbers of organizations or data centers (e.g.,
medical or financial) train a global model with a large amount of data along with computation power. In an
environment where organizations are prohibited from sharing their data due to data privacy and security reasons,
cross-silo federated learning comes into the picture. The computation and storage capacity of the cross-silo
setting is high on a relatively small scale, while the stability is low compared to cross-device.
2.2.2
Cross-Device. In a Cross-Device federated learning setting, there are a scalable number of clients with
small amounts of data compared to a cross-silo setting where there are only a few clients with large amounts
of data. As a result, the cross-device system develops models for large-scale dispersed data inside the same
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
4
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
After, each client updates it's own local gradients
 The updated local gradients are sent to the selected 
party, in this case it is blood bank. This is to show 
that clients can communicate during DFL"
 The model is then updated with local data and 
gradients"
 Lastly, the updated model is sent to all other parties.
2
3
1
Fig. 2. Illustration of decentralized architecture in federated learning
application [75]; the clients can be enabled and disabled as per the requirement and are usually mobile and IoT
devices. The system should be powerful enough to manage many devices and handle common failures such as
unstable connections, power failure, etc.
2.3
Federated Server
The central server serves as a manager in a cross-device environment. It oversees the communication between
the client devices, the server, and the global machine learning model. At the beginning of the federated learning
training process, the client starts a server training service; a login request is required from each client-side to
join the server training session.
The server will check the credentials to validate the request and allow the clients to join the session only in a
successful authentication. The server session decides the minimum and a maximum number of client devices
that need to be added to start the training process.
In a decentralized environment, all devices interact directly with one another and participate equally in global
model training. The server, in this case, is all of the local devices. Practical Federated Gradient Boosting Decision
Trees [70] is an example of such a framework, in which each device trains decision trees sequentially, and the
final model is the sum of all the trees. Designing a completely decentralized FLS with appropriate communication
overhead is difficult.
Each local model training happens on the client’s side, so the server does not need access to the model training
data. Moreover, local models only share the model updates instead of the actual copy of data. The client’s devices
decide the number of epochs to run during each round of training. Typically, the computing is used for model
training and aggregation, while the communication is used to exchange model parameters.
Once the server receives all the model updates from all the participating devices, it performs the model
aggregation based on the selected aggregation algorithm and gets the overall updated global model. This process
completes the single round of the Federated Learning session. Furthermore, the next round starts and training
continues until the maximum number of rounds on the server is completed. The aggregation technique aids in the
gathering of model updates from local models of the devices. Listed below are some popular application-oriented
aggregation algorithms in detail.
• FedAvg Algorithm FedAvg is the first and most widely used Federated learning algorithm proposed by
Google [77]. It distributes training data across mobile devices and trains a shared model by combining
locally calculated updates. The FedAvg algorithm is a robust approach experimented on five different
architectures, four kinds of datasets, and combined stochastic gradient descent on each client with a server
that performs model averaging. The algorithm can be written as
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
5
𝑓(𝑤) =
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑛𝑘
𝑛𝐹𝑘(𝑤)
where
𝐹𝑘(𝑤) = 1
𝑛𝑘
∑︁
𝑖∈P𝑘
𝑓𝑖(𝑤)
(1)
Where P𝑘the set of indexes of data points on client k, distributed uniformly at random, with 𝑛𝑘= |𝑃𝑘|
and 𝑤are model parameters. The focus of the proposed research is on the optimization’s non-IID data
distributions and imbalanced properties, as well as the nature of the communication constraints.
• FedMa Algorithm FedMA [115] is a federated learning method for current neural network designs such
as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and LSTMs. FedMA builds the shared global model layer by
layer by matching and averaging hidden components with comparable feature extraction signatures (i.e.
channels for convolution layers; hidden states for LSTM; neurons for fully connected layers).
• FedNAS Algorithm One of the major issues on working with Non-I.I.D data is that it requires the
developers to design and choose multiple architectures that tunes the hyper parameters and fits the
scattered data. This is design process is expensive due to large number of communication rounds and
computational burden. FedNAS - Federated Neural Architecture Search [44] is an algorithm that improves
the model accuracy by automating the manual design process. The algorithm helps scattered workers to
collaboratively search for a better architecture.
• FedGKT Algorithm The fact that federated learning ensures privacy and confidentiality is one of its
most appealing features. There is, however, a limit to the computation capabilities of the edge nodes.
Convolutional neural networks are used to boost the model’s performance and accuracy, however when
employed with FL restrictions, large models might burden edge nodes and increase communication costs.
A group knowledge transfer training technique intends to reduce the need for edge compute while keeping
edge training inexpensive by lowering communication bandwidths for training with CNNs at the edge.
FedGKT [45] requires 9 to 17 times less computing resources on edge devices than FedAvg. In comparison
to FedAvg, the authors claim that this algorithm can achieve the same or slightly higher accuracy.
• Secured Weighted Aggregation The proposed algorithm [42] is relying on homomorphic encryption -
cryptosystem for calculating the client’s weights in a privacy-preserving manner. The algorithm adopts
a Zero-Knowledge Proof(ZKP) based verification scheme to prevent the central servers and clients from
receiving fraudulent messages from each other. This is the first aggregation algorithm that deals with Data
disparity and fraudulent messages
• Secure Federated matrix factorization The authors of this research offer a Federated Matrix Factor-
ization Framework to address the problem of disclosing data through gradients FedMF [17]. Distributed
machine learning and homomorphic encryption techniques are used in the system. FedMF is a user-level
distributed matrix factorization framework that allows the model to be learned by uploading the gradient
information to the server rather than the raw preference information. The authors utilize homomorphic
encryption to improve distributed matrix factorization and boost security since gradient information can
leak user information to some extent.
• Inprivate Digging The authors concentrate on a tree-based data mining concept and provide privacy-
preserving approaches for two of the most popular tasks: Regression and Binary Classification, in which
individual data owners can train locally in a differentially private way [133]. They created and implemented
a privacy-preserving Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) system that allows several regression trees
trained by distinct data owners to be safely aggregated into an ensemble without the need of a third party.
• Federated Forest The authors provided a system that allows random forests to be trained in a vertical
FL scenario [74]. Throughout the development of each node, the party with the related split feature is in
charge of splitting the samples and exchanging the results. To safeguard privacy, they encrypt the data that
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
6
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
is sent. Their method is equally accurate as of the non-federated one. Both classification and regression
tasks are supported by the model.
2.3.1
Model Evaluation. In traditional centralized machine learning, evaluation metrics are used to assess the
performance and measure the quality of the model. Evaluation metrics mainly include accuracy, precision, and
recall, etc. Accuracy is a fraction of the correct samples to all samples. Precision is the fraction of actual positive
samples among the positive samples, while recall is the fraction of actual positive samples among the samples
from true positive or false negative.
In a federated learning setup, the above metrics are insufficient to evaluate the performance of the models.
In this setting, it is intended to identify the evaluation metrics for both qualitative and quantitative methods.
Training speed, performance, and the quantity of data transferred are utilized as assessment measures in existing
federated learning studies. An FL model is evaluated by examining the aggregated model after being assigned
to each clients’ local evaluation dataset. Following then, the server shares each client’s performance with it,
aggregating the local results to produce global assessment metrics.
FedEval [18] is an evaluation framework for FL systems. It introduces the “ACTPR” model, i.e., using accuracy,
communication, time consumption, privacy, and robustness as its evaluation targets.
2.4
Federated Client
In a federated learning setting, the client devices are the hardware components that perform the local model
training and loss minimization The main objective is to train local device models on their private data and share
the updates with the federated server where the aggregation is performed. In a decentralized federated learning
system, the client devices communicate among themselves without the interference of the central server. Typical
clients in federated learning settings could be smartphones, IoT devices, or organizations such as hospitals. Each
client has its specific private training dataset and its local model.
A study in [75] describes the client management patterns that control the local devices’ information and their
connection with the central server. The client registry is the initial component, and it controls the information
about the participating devices. The second component, the client selector, selects the devices for the federated
training task. To improve the training model’s performance and efficiency, the third component, client cluster,
clusters client devices depending on particular parameters (e.g., data distribution, available resources).
2.4.1
Data Partitioning. Federated learning systems are commonly classified as horizontal, vertical, or hybrid
based on how data is spread through the sample and feature spaces.
• Horizontal Federated Learning
– Concept Horizontal federated learning involves data that is shared horizontally which involves datasets
sharing the same feature space but being different in samples [127]. Each group in horizontal FL has
access to the entire feature set and labels, allowing them to train their local model using their dataset.
After that, all of the parties exchange their model updates with an aggregator and then generate a global
model by combining, for example, the model weights obtained from different parties. [122] An example
of horizontal data split in federated learning setup is shown in figure 3. Assuming there is a blood bank
laboratory having details of the patients stored as groups in a database collected under Name, Age, and
Blood Person features. In figure 3, persons 1, 2, and 3 represent groups of patients’ data samples sharing
the same features – Name, Age and Blood Group. Suppose a Horizontal Federated learning method is to
be used. In that case, the machine learning model will run on each of these samples (person) individually,
allowing them to train the local model and finally exchange and aggregate model weights to generate a
global model.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
7
– Applications The FedAvg algorithm proposed in [103] is the best example of a typical horizontal
federated learning setup. Although horizontal federated learning protects user privacy and aims to
control the communication cost, it poses challenges compared to distributed learning. Keeping in mind
the protocols of federated learning and applications of neural networks, a new algorithm titled “Federated
neural network” was proposed for single and multi-objective search purposes [136]. In comparison to
Secure Multiparty Computation and Homomorphic Encryption, this study also analyzes how Differential
Privacy may be employed best in horizontal federated learning.
EHRs have proven to be an aid for the development of scientific evidence for improving the quality
of healthcare systems and they are also used as a data resource for laboratory-based public health
surveillance. Techniques have been created for computing statistics on distributed databases without
disclosing any personal details other than the statistical results. In a distributed dataset, duplicate records
can lead to incorrect statistical findings. As a result, safe deduplication is an effective preprocessing
step for improving the precision of statistical analysis of a distributed dataset. A stable protocol using a
deterministic record linking algorithm for deduplication of horizontally partitioned datasets [131]. They
introduced a new robust and scalable protocol for privacy-preserving deduplication of a horizontally
partitioned dataset based on Bloom filters. According to the results of the experiments, within 45 seconds,
one million virtual documents were deduplicated across 20 data custodians. The protocol is proven to be
more effective and flexible than previous protocols for the same problem.
Blood Bank Databasae
Horizontal Data split by examples
. Nam*
. Ag*
. Blood Group
Label
. Nam*
. Ag*
. Blood Group
Label
. Nam*
. Ag*
. Blood Group
Label
Person 1
Person 2
Person 3
Subject
Features
Fig. 3. Horizontal Data split by examples
• Vertical Federated Learning
– Concept Vertical federated learning can also be called feature-based federated learning. This is used
when the data shared among them contains different features but similar samples. This requires a different
kind of training architecture when compared to horizontal federated learning. It may or may not involve a
central server or a third neutral party. Vertical FL (VFL) applies to collective situations in which individual
parties do not have access to the whole collection of features and labels and thus are unable to train
a model locally using their datasets. Parties’ datasets, in particular, must be synchronized to construct
the full function vector without revealing their respective training data, and model training must be
performed in a privacy-preserving manner. [123] An example of vertical data split by examples is shown
in figure 4.Assuming a blood bank laboratory in a hospital has data from the same group of patients. As
seen in figure 4., the blood bank database stores the details of the patient groups under Name, Age, and
Blood group. At the same time, the hospital database stores the details of the same patient groups under
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
8
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Name, Age, Date of Birth, Blood group, and Medical History. If a Vertical Federated learning method is to
be used, the first dataset for the machine learning model would be the data sample from Person 1 of the
Blood Bank Database and Hospital Database. Furthermore, the second dataset will be data samples from
Person 2 of the Blood Bank database and Hospital Database, respectively.
– Applications FedAI uses horizontal federated learning for improving an anti-money laundering model
and the use of vertical federated learning to obtain a better risk management model. Homomorphic
Encryption is the privacy-preserving technique that is usually adopted when the data is distributed
vertically. Recently, a two-party design has been proposed by eliminating the trusted coordinator, which
considerably decreases the system’s complexity [128].
In the healthcare sector, information sharing is becoming increasingly relevant. First and foremost for
medical reasons, such as the sharing of treatment records between healthcare providers, but also for
secondary purposes, such as the implementation of value-based healthcare and processes. While these
requirements allow information to be transferred, they also pose concerns regarding maintainability and
possession, as well as protection and privacy. Provenance and permission become more complicated as
data is shared by various health care providers. Sending programs containing queries and algorithms to
the data source is one of the alternatives to data transfer. To address these problems, the authors in [105]
provide an architecture to enable algorithm conversion and execution, and use this infrastructure in a
proof-of-concept setup. The proof-of-concept (PoC) focuses on processing data that has been vertically
partitioned from two institutes. In a population cohort analysis, the PoC is used as a baseline to look at
the causes of diabetes initiation and development, including social and environmental conditions.
Since full collections of labels and functions are not controlled by one person, privacy-preserving vertical
FL is difficult. Existing vertical FL approaches necessitate multiple peer-to-peer interactions among
parties, resulting in longer training periods, and are limited to (roughly) linear models and only two
parties. To bridge this void, the authors of [123] suggest FedV, a framework for safe gradient computing
in vertical settings for a variety of commonly used machine learning models. Linear simulations, logistic
regression, and support vectors are examples of these types of models. FedV uses functional encryption
mechanisms to eliminate the need for peer-to-peer correspondence between parties. FedV can attain
shorter preparation times as a result of this. It’s also successful for wider and ever-changing groups of
parties.
• Hybrid/Transfer Federated Learning
– Concept Federated transfer learning [127] was introduced to tackle the challenge of integrating the
scattered data and improve statistical modeling while performing data federation. It is also studied that
this framework requires minimal modifications to the model structure and the result produced are as
efficient as the non-privacy preserving transfer learning. Federated transfer learning does not depend
on any requirement such as common feature space or common sample space and it supports transfer
learning in providing solutions for the entire sample and feature space while data federation is taking
place.
Federated transfer learning is a term that recognizes difficult situations in which data parties only
have partial overlap in the user or function space and uses current transfer learning strategies to
collaboratively construct models. The current formulation is only good for two clients [59]. An illustration
of hybrid/transfer federated learning is shown in figure 5.
– Applications FedHealth is one such algorithm that uses the concept of federated transfer learning in
smart wearable healthcare devices [58]. The algorithm performs data aggregation through federated
learning and builds personalized models by transfer learning without compromising on the privacy and
security of the model and data.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
9
Blood Bank Database
Hospital Database
( Nam$
( Ag$
( Blood Group
Label
( Nam$
( Ag$
( Blood Group
Label
( Nam$
( Ag$
( Blood Group
Label
Person 1
Person 2
Person 3
Subject
Features
Vertical Data
Vertical Data
( Nam$
( Ag$
( Blood Group
Label
( Nam$
( Ag$
( Blood Group
Label
( Nam$
( Ag$
( Blood Group
Label
Person 1
Person 2
Person 3
Subject
Features
Fig. 4. Vertical Data split by examples
The shortage of massive datasets has hampered the progress of deep learning (DL) approaches in the field
of Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) for the classification of electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings[58].
The ability to create a large EEG BCI dataset by combining several small ones for jointly training machine
learning models is limited due to privacy issues associated with EEG signals. Addressing this issue, a
novel privacy-preserving deep learning architecture centered on the federated learning system, for EEG
classification called Federated Transfer Learning (FTL) [58].As a result, in a subject-adaptive study, the
FTL method had a 2% better classification accuracy.
Although current federated learning systems (FLSs) primarily focus on one type of partition, data
partitioning among parties in many other applications can be a combination of horizontal and vertical
partitioning. As an example, consider a cancer detection method. A consortium of hospitals needs to
build a FLS for cancer diagnosis, but each hospital has separate patients and medical test outcomes.
In such cases, transfer learning could be an option. [103] suggest a stable federated transfer learning
method that can learn a representation of a party’s features using similar instances. This framework
involves only minor changes to the original model layout and achieves the same degree of consistency as
non-privacy-preserving transfer learning. It is adaptable and can be used for a variety of stable multi-party
machine learning activities.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
10
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Clinic
Hospital
Federated 
Model
Server
Research Lab
Privacy
Privacy
Privacy
Fig. 5. Transfer learning in federated learning
2.4.2
Data Pre-processing and Feature Engineering. Data Preprocessing is an essential and challenging task in
the FL training process due to the sensitive and distributed nature of the data. Moreover, it takes a long time
to adapt centralized preprocessing approaches to federated data. Data preprocessing involves data cleaning,
missing values imputation, and other steps to maintain consistency between distributed datasets of different
clients without knowing the underlying distribution.
A few scenarios require domain knowledge to clean, structure the data, and extract data features (properties,
characteristics, attributes) from raw data. [58] used medical knowledge and AI techniques to clean and nor-
malize the raw patient data collected from hospitals. The data from the hospital includes outpatient/in-patient
prescriptions, outpatient/in-patient EHRs, and other metadata.
2.4.3
Privacy Preservation in FL. Federated learning involves the participation of thousands or millions of devices
[129] such as phones, cars, medical institutions, etc. The federated learning environment, where the model is
learned locally without disclosing to any clients the input data or the output of the model, avoids direct leakage
when training or using the model assuring the client’s (health systems from medical institutions in this case)
dataset is kept as private as possible. This is demonstrated by a model developed using patient Electronic Health
Records (EHR) and a consumer-based application such as screening atrial fibrillation with electrocardiograms
obtained by smartwatches [87]. Sensitive patient data is kept in local institutions or with individual consumers
rather than being exposed to the federated model learning process, ensuring the patient’s privacy. The ‘No peek’
rule [113] refers to techniques of distributed deep learning models that do not look at raw data once it leaves the
clients. A good example explaining this would be, hospitals or healthcare systems at institutions that are not
allowed to share data with for-profit entities due to trust issues. Such institutions are also restricted from sharing
it with outside entities due to the consent of patients and various regulations like HIPAA [113] Listed below are
few methods of privacy-preserving in FL.
Secure Privacy-preserving learning on medical data mainly involves protecting the collection of personal data
used in ML model training and inference in such a way that it does not reveal any additional information about
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
11
the subjects. Cryptographic techniques and differential privacy techniques are the most extensively utilized
methods for privacy-preserving ML [4]
• Cryptographic methods are used when encrypted data is required during testing and training phases. The
widely used method under this is Homomorphic encryption and Secret sharing. Homomorphic encryption
involves the encryption of data using ciphertext and public keys. It enables computations like addition and
multiplication, which is a base for other complex functions, on encrypted data.
• Secret Sharing The technique of transmitting secrets to various parties is known as secret sharing while
keeping a "share" of the secret. Only when all individual shares are merged will the secret be reconstructed.
The secret is reconstructed in some configurations that won’t need all shares to be merged. A privacy-
preserving system for emotion detection is introduced in [49]. The authors used a multi-secret sharing
method to transfer audio-visual data gathered from users to the cloud using edge devices where a CNN
and sparse auto-encoder were applied for the extraction of features. The vector machine (SVM) was used
for emotion and support identification.
• Differential privacy Differential Privacy (DP) is another technique to protect the privacy of individual
data which has been used in areas that use algorithms like boosting [34], principal component analysis
[19], and support vector machines. Differential privacy involves the addition of noise to model updates as
they communicate with servers and clients[33] . Differential privacy, on the other hand, is known to shield
users from data leakage to a limited level and may lower prediction accuracy performance [22]. Hence
many researchers combine DP with the Secured Multiparty computations technique to decrease the growth
of noise injection and data poisoning attacks [5]. While there is an exchange in convergence rates at the
participant level - Differential Privacy (DP) may not help much in the protection of users and also may
affect the accuracy of the model. Participant level DP is good when a large pool of devices are participating
in the process. The ability of participant-level DP for a small pool of participants is yet to be improved and
focused on working for a better convergence at this small level.
• SMPC - Secure MultiParty Computation Secured MultiParty Computation approach provides clear
security guarantees even though it is in general a less efficient approach. Privacy-Preserving Record Linkage
(PPRL) [63] is one such example where secured multi-party computation is being used. SMC was also
introduced to Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) and drug-target Interaction prediction
for drug discovery [63]. SMC applies the concept of three distinct responsibilities for parties. There are
input parties who contribute data to the calculation that must be protected. Computation parties carry out
the privacy-preserving computation on the data given. Apart from what is revealed through the architecture
of the application, the computation parties should not learn anything new from the execution. Finally,
there are result parties who are given the computation’s results.
Table 1: Summary of existing studies on FL in Healthcare since 2015
A Federated Network for Translational Cancer Re-
search Using Clinical Data and Biospecimens
[53]
2015
Learning
Systems
This report describes a fully functional federated
data and biospecimen sharing network for cross-
institutional cancer research collaboration
Privacy-preserving GWAS analysis on federated ge-
nomic datasets
[27]
2015
Framework
On federated genomic datasets, this research proposes
a privacy-preserving GWAS methodology
Title
Ref
Year
Category
Content
Continued on next page
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
12
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Table 1: Summary of existing studies on FL in Healthcare since 2015 (Continued)
Privacy-Preserving Integration of Medical Data
[80]
2017
Protocol
This work presents a safe and privacy-preserving
method for searching and integrating health care data
from diverse sources
LoAdaBoost: loss-based AdaBoost federated machine
learning with reduced computational complexity on
IID and non-IID intensive care data
[51]
2018
Learning
Systems
LoAdaBoost, a methodology for increasing the effi-
ciency of federated machine learning, was suggested
in this research, and the algorithm was evaluated using
data from intensive care units in hospitals
Federated learning of predictive models from federated
electronic health records
[13]
2018
Framework
A novel FL framework is presented that can train pre-
dictive models through peer-to-peer cooperation in-
stead of exchanging raw EHR data
FADL:Federated-Autonomous Deep Learning for Dis-
tributed Electronic Health Record
[72]
2018
Learning
Systems
By presenting a novel approach called Federated-
Autonomous Deep Learning, this study illustrates the
efficacy of FL by using ICU data from 58 different hospi-
tals to predict patient mortality can be trained quickly
without transferring health data out of their silos under
FL environment (FADL)
Patient Clustering Improves Efficiency of Federated
Machine Learning to predict mortality and hospital
stay time using distributed Electronic Medical Records
[50]
2019
FL in
Biomedical
The community-based federated machine learning
(CBFL) technique is described in this research, and
it is tested on non-IID ICU EMRs.
FedHealth: A Federated Transfer Learning Framework
for Wearable Healthcare
[20]
2019
FL in
Healthcare IoT
To address data privacy concerns, this paper pro-
poses a federated transfer learning system for wearable
healthcare
Communication-Efficient Federated Deep Learning
with Asynchronous Model Update and Temporally
Weighted Aggregation
[20]
2019
Learning
Systems
This paper presents a synchronous learning strategy
for FL clients
Federated deep learning for detecting COVID-19 lung
abnormalities in CT: a privacy-preserving multina-
tional validation study
[32]
2019
Diagnosis
With external validation on patients from a global co-
hort, this report reveals the efficiency of an FL system
for identifying COVID-19 associated CT anomalies
Federated Learning for Healthcare Informatics
[121]
2019
Survey
This survey study provides an overview of federated
learning systems, focusing on biomedical applications
Federated electronic health records research technol-
ogy to support clinical trial protocol optimization: Evi-
dence from EHR4CR and the InSite platform
[25]
2019
FL in
EHR data
This paper determines if inclusion/exclusion (I/E) cri-
teria of clinical trial protocols can be represented as
structured queries along with those executed using a
secure federated research platform (InSite) on hospital
electronic health records (EHR)
Predicting Adverse Drug Reactions on Distributed
Health Data using Federated Learning
[24]
2019
Framework
To increase the global model’s predictive power, this re-
search proposes two unique approaches to local model
aggregation
Title
Ref
Year
Category
Content
Continued on next page
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
13
Table 1: Summary of existing studies on FL in Healthcare since 2015 (Continued)
Privacy-preserving
Federated
Brain
Tumour
Segmentation
[70]
2019
FL in
Biomedical
Adopting the BraTS dataset for brain tumor segmenta-
tion, this research investigates the possibility of using
differential-privacy approaches to secure patient data
in a federated learning context
Multi-site fMRI Analysis Using Privacy-preserving
Federated Learning and Domain Adaptation: ABIDE
Results
[71]
2020
Medical Image
Analysis
This work proposes a privacy-preserving multi-site
fMRI classification that ensures that private infor-
mation cannot be retrieved from model gradients or
weights
Stochastic Channel-Based Federated Learning With
Neural Network Pruning for Medical Data Privacy
Preservation: Model Development and Experimental
Validation
[101]
2020
Learning
Systems
For the study of distributed medical data, this research
proposes a privacy-preserving approach called stochas-
tic channel-based federated learning (SCBFL)
Federated learning in medicine: facilitating multi-
institutional collaborations without sharing patient
data
[102]
2020
Medicine
This research shows that utilizing data from ten uni-
versities, the models achieve 99 percent model quality
and discuss the impact of data distribution across par-
ticipating institutions
FedHome: Cloud-Edge based Personalized Federated
Learning for In-Home Health Monitoring
[117]
2020
FL in
Healthcare IoT
FedHome, a cloud-edge-based federated learning ar-
chitecture for in-home health monitoring, is proposed
in this research
The future of digital health with federated learning
[95]
2020
Survey
This survey report looks at how FL could help with
the future of digital health, as well as the obstacles
Federated Learning on Clinical Benchmark Data: Per-
formance Assessment
[65]
2020
Benchmark
The research uses three benchmark datasets, including
a clinical benchmark dataset, to assess the reliability
and performance of FL
FedMed: A Federated Learning Framework for Lan-
guage Modeling
[118]
2020
Framework
To address model aggregation and communication
costs in the FL environment, this study provides a
unique Federated Mediation (FedMed) framework with
adaptive aggregation, mediation incentive scheme, and
topK method
Federated Learning for Breast Density Classification:
A Real-World Implementation
[96]
2020
Medical Image
Analysis
This article demonstrates the efficacy of FL by training
a model for breast density categorization based on
Breast Imaging, Reporting, and Data systems utilizing
data from seven clinical institutions across the world
(BI-RADS)
Federated
Transfer
Learning
for
EEG
Signal
Classification
[57]
2020
Learning
Systems
This work proposes a unique privacy-preserving DL
architecture called federated transfer learning that uses
the FL in EEG classification (FTL)
COVID-19 detection using federated machine learning
[98]
2021
Diagnosis
To determine which parameters impact model predic-
tion accuracy and loss, this study employed a descrip-
tive dataset and chest x-ray (CXR) images from COVID-
19 patients in an FL context
Title
Ref
Year
Category
Content
Continued on next page
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
14
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Table 1: Summary of existing studies on FL in Healthcare since 2015 (Continued)
Implementing Vertical Federated Learning Using Au-
toencoders: Practical Application, Generalizability, and
Utility Study
[16]
2021
Learning
Systems
Without revealing the raw data, this research shows
that FL on vertically partitioned data may perform
equivalent to centralized models
Federated Learning Meets Human Emotions: A Decen-
tralized Framework for Human–Computer Interaction
for IoT Applications
[23]
2021
FL in
Biomedical
This article combines facial expression and voice in-
puts to construct an emotion monitoring & analysis
system using FL
FeARH: Federated machine learning with anonymous
random hybridization on electronic medical records
[28]
2021
Learning
Systems
This research study suggests a novel FL method to deal
with untrustworthy conditions
Federated Learning for Thyroid Ultrasound Image
Analysis to Protect Personal Information: Validation
Study in a Real Health Care Environment
[66]
2021
Diagnosis
The purpose of this research is to see if FL’s perfor-
mance is equivalent to that of traditional deep learning
Learning From Others Without Sacrificing Privacy:
Simulation Comparing Centralized and Federated Ma-
chine Learning on Mobile Health Data
[73]
2021
FL in
Healthcare IoT
The research explores FL use cases in a mHealth en-
vironment and uses a mHealth data set to simulate
federated learning
Cloud-Based Federated Learning Implementation
Across Medical Centers
[94]
2021
FL in
EHR data
This research mimics an FL environment in order to in-
vestigate multiple federated learning implementations
and apply FL algorithms to data from two academic
medical facilities’ electronic health records
Federated learning improves site performance in mul-
ticenter deep learning without data sharing
[99]
2021
FL in
EHR data
This study demonstrates how to provide multi-
institutional training in a FL environment without
centralization
A Resource-Constrained and Privacy-Preserving Edge-
Computing-Enabled Clinical Decision System: A Fed-
erated Reinforcement Learning Approach
[124]
2021
FL in
EHR data
This article combines mobile-edge computing (MEC)
with software-defined networking to make use of
the processing and storage capabilities available
among edge nodes (ENs) (i.e., MEC servers) in the
Fl environment
Variation-Aware Federated Learning with Multi-
Source Decentralized Medical Image Data
[125]
2021
Learning
Systems
Variation-aware federated learning (VAFL) is a method-
ology proposed in this research for minimising client
variations by transforming all clients’ images into a
shared image space
Federated Learning in a Medical Context: A Systematic
Literature Review
[89]
2021
Survey
This survey article examines federated learning and
its relevance to sensitive healthcare data
Federated Learning for Smart Healthcare: A Survey
[82]
2021
Survey
The application of FL in smart healthcare and IoT de-
vices are reviewed and surveyed in this survey report
Title
Ref
Year
Category
Content
2.5
Machine Learning Pipeline
The life cycle of a federated learning system consists of 8 primary steps which include task initialisation, selection,
configuration, model training, client server communication, scheduling and optimisation, versioning testing
deployment and termination. The steps are illustrated in the diagram shown below. (fig 6)
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
15
Workflow / Life cycle of FL system 
% Submit and Run 
FL Tasks 
Configuration
% FL Client Selection 
& Registration
Selection
Task Initialisation 
% Global model 
encryption 
% Local model 
training 
% Local gradients 
perturbation & 
Server 
aggregation 
Model training 
% Global model 
update
% Reporting   
% Continuous 
Learning
Client Server 
Communication 
Scheduling and 
Optimisation  
Versioning, Testing, 
and Deployment  
Termination
Fig. 6. Machine Learning Pipeline
In FL settings, three major machine learning steps include model selection, model training, and hyperparameter
tuning.
2.5.1
Model Selection. The model selection stage includes the process of selecting the optimal model for federated
data. Model selection depends on the type of task as well as size, quality, and type of the federated data. For
example, if the problem is classification on diagnostic images, A convolution neural network is the best choice
for this task. There have been several attempts in recent years to propose and create new models for federated
settings. However, most FL tasks consider state-of-the-art, widely used models in their setting. Neural networks
(NN) are the most popular and state-of-the-art in many machine learning tasks in the FL setting. For example,
[43] uses a variant of LSTM called Coupled Input and Forget Gate (CIFG) to predict the next word in the mobile
keyboard. [21] uses a specific Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) network with a transfer learning method
for the classification task. A tree-based FLS has shown impressive performance on classification and regression
tasks. [67] used the FLSs for Gradient boosting decision trees (GBDTs) on horizontally and vertically federated
data, respectively. Most Federated Learning frameworks use stochastic gradient descent methods to optimize
machine learning models such as neural networks and logistic regression. Besides Neural Networks and tree-based
networks, linear models (e.g., linear regression, support vector machines) are standard and easy-to-use methods.
2.5.2
Model Training. Following the selection of a model, the next stage in the ML pipeline is model training.
Different variants of the model and a combination of optimizing hyperparameters are used to decide the final
model with good accuracy. This process [9] involves the following steps
• Training the local models on their local training dataset
• Sharing of the local parameters to the server
• Aggregation of local models’ parameters on the server using the aggregation operator and
• Updating the local models with the aggregated global model
• Repeat the loop
2.5.3
Model Parameters. The parameters are learned from federated data, and hyper-parameters are utilized to
fine-tune the output for the best match. The hyper-parameters such as learning rate, number of training epochs,
mini-batch size, and optimizer have to be tuned based on the constraints of the ML application (e.g., available
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
16
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
computing power, available memory, bandwidth). [116] demonstrated how local data could be used to fine-tune
federated models. They provided methods for determining the appropriate hyper-parameters for fine-tuning and
proved that it enhances models’ next word prediction in mobile keyboards. [132] offered numerous variations
of the fine-tuning strategy to improve the local adaptation. The network architecture is designed manually,
which takes a significant amount of effort and experience in that field. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an
algorithmic-based method to search the neural network design utilizing optimization algorithms. In recent years
there has been progress in federated neural architecture search. It aims to optimize the design of models in the
federated learning environment. The offline federated NAS framework proposed by [135] uses a multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm to design the optimal network.
3
CHALLENGES & ISSUES
Some various challenges and issues can be found at each step in the implementation of a federated learning
system. In this paper, we classify the challenges and issues into three major subcategories. The first subcategory
involves all issues related to the privacy of the model and the attacks that happen on the system. The second
subcategory consists of papers that describe the issues related to data such as limited data, data bias, or data
poisoning.
The kinds of communication that can take place in a federated learning setup are between a server and an
edge device, between two edge devices, and or between more than one server. The main challenge here is to
answer some of the following questions: how effective can this communication be without having to lose the
participating devices? How can the number of communication rounds be reduced to avoid large usage of battery
or net on edge devices? And, how can all of this be done without affecting the model and its result metrics?
This subsection brings down papers addressing these major issues. Hence, the third subsection speaks about
communication challenges. An illustration of this section is presented in figure 7.
Challenges of FL in Healthcare
Privacy and Attacks
8 Adversarial attacks5
8 Inference and poisoning attacks5
8 Genomic data privacy 
8 Data quality5
8 Data biases5
8 Data noises 
8 Failure and dropouts5
8 Energy Consumption5
8 Computational and Communication 
overhead
Data Challenges
Communication Challenges
Fig. 7. Challenges of Federated Learning in healthcare
3.1
Privacy and attacks
• Adversarial Attacks Improper or inadequate learning refers to cases where improper hyperparameters
are learned in the ML/DL model, e.g., learning rate, epochs, batch size. In a predictive healthcare setting,
machine learning models are created using previous patient data and then evaluated on new patients, raising
concerns about the validity of the predictions.This is because of distribution shifts.And such differences can
be exploited for generating adversarial examples [86] which is now a huge concern. In addition, ML/DL
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
17
versions are strictly susceptible to various risks to the protection and privacy, such as adversarial attacks
[11, 108]
• Inference and poisoning attacks Federated learning systems are yet to be aware of the future federated
learning algorithm design on privacy preservation. [76] This survey on threats to federated learning
provides a concise introduction to the topic of federated learning and the two major federated learning
methods are exposed to, inference attacks and poisoning attacks. It also summarizes the kinds of threat
models a system can be prone to and highlights the key techniques as well as fundamental assumptions
adopted by various attackers.
• Evasion Attack Evasion/exploratory attacks are among the most common adversarial attacks and are
carried out during the inference time. This setting does not imply any influence over the training data.
In this attack, an adversary attempts to evade the deployed model by feeding malicious data samples
or collecting evidence about the model features during the inference phase. The amount of knowledge
available to the adversary about the model determines the efficiency of such attacks. Various methods have
been presented to make the FL models more robust against evasion attacks.
• Inadequate model training
Machine learning models while training may involve flaws. The model training flaws include improper or
inadequate training, violations of privacy, model poisoning, or theft. Improper or inadequate learning refers
to cases where improper parameters are learned in the ML/DL model, e.g., learning rate, epochs, batch
size. The deployment of the model involving ML/DL techniques mainly revolves around human-centric
decisions. And hence, considering fairness, accountability while ensuring the robustness of the system
is crucial at this stage. The deployment stage can involve Evasion attacks, System Disruption, Network
Issues, etc.
• Gradient Inversion Attack
This attack strategy implies that it is possible to recover and reconstruct input data from the gradient
knowledge of trained and untrained model parameters. [39] investigates the impact of design and settings
on the difficulty of reconstructing an input image from grading data and demonstrates that any input to a
fully connected layer could be reconstructed analytically without regard to the rest of the model design.
• Privacy in Genomic Data
The human genome is a complete set of genetic information of a human living organism composed of 4
different bases (A, T, G, C) and can provide a treasure of highly sensitive and personal information of an
individual. With the innovation in the next-generation technologies, a whole new genome complex can be
determined of an organism. The use of genome sequencing is used for purposes like personalized genomic
medicine, disease diagnosis, and preventive treatment. [2] discusses the various privacy issues in genomic
data processing such as querying on genomic data and carrying alignment processes on commercial public
clouds in a privacy-preserving and effective manner. The paper also concludes that despite the innovations
and study in medicines and health science, the use of sequencing technology still lacks privacy preservation
of genomic data leading to a lot of genomic data leakage.
3.2
Challenges related to Data
• Noises in different kinds of data The healthcare industries face a huge threat when it comes to data
collection. Large amounts of clinical data are collected in the form of EHRs, medical images, radiology
reports, etc.. which requires a lot of human effort and is time-consuming. Multishot MRI, one of the widely
used imaging modalities used to acquire high-resolution medical images can involve Instrumental and
Environmental Noise due to some undesirable artifacts in the resulting image [92] A variety of health
data including patient data from multi-omic approaches, as well as clinical, behavioral, environmental,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
18
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
and drug data can be analyzed using the AI technologies being developed at the present. [114] mentions
five major types of data used in AI for health such as multi-omics data, clinical data, behavioral/wellness
data, environmental data, as well as research and development data. Each data type has its challenges,
implications, and future directions.
• Improper annotation of data
Healthcare datasets involve annotation of data samples which is a crucial step in the process of healthcare
applications. Hence, they should be performed by legally keeping privacy concerns in mind and with proper
guidelines. The inability to perform labeling rightly leads to improper annotations and many efficiency
challenges like imbalanced dataset, class imbalance, and Bias and data sparsity [92].
• Data biases Data biases [59] act as the main driver of unfairness in machine learning models. It can result
in high risks when used in federated learning systems. Moreover, biases can end up affecting areas like
training data, cognitive sampling, reporting, and confirmation biases. Artificial intelligence (AI) models
often need a vast volume of high-quality training data, which contrasts sharply with the existing drug
development pipelines’ limited and skewed data. And, this decentralized machine learning paradigm has
a high scope in contributing to the improvement of AI-Based drug discovery [120]. The superiority of
the federated learning mechanism is demonstrated on pooled datasets with 7 aqueous solubility datasets
including high and low biases. The authors also address the small data and biased data dilemma in drug
discovery and prove the promising role of federated learning.
• False positives and false negatives The Healthcare industry deals with a large amount of patient data and
this involves high chances of containing missing observations or variables. However, ignoring these values
during analysis by knowing their relationships with already observed and unobserved data is the simplest
way to avoid them. On the other hand, using these missing observations leads to well-known problems
like false positives and false negatives and thus there is a need for complete and compact healthcare data.
Issues like false positives and false negatives not only are caused due to the use of missing values but also
due to incomplete training or inefficient training of the model. The root cause behind inefficient training
is the incomplete data being fed for inference. ML-powered healthcare demands cautious applications of
analytical methods [90]. And that is why along with quantity, quality of data also plays a major role.
• Data Quality [15] A survey paper on applicable machine learning algorithms in a federated environment
mentions the importance of Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) Data points and their contribution
to the factor of lowering the chances of class imbalance. Many times the local data collected can lack in size
and major data points which may obstruct representing the underlying structure of a federated learning
system. Using such a small-sized imbalance dataset has high chances of hindering the globe model and its
accuracy. [55] has trained the global model on historical patient data of Radiation Therapy (RT); because
RT technique is constantly evolving, such models provide little value to clinical practice today. In addition,
Phase III clinical trials give high-quality evidence, but they have the drawback of taking a long time to
complete. However, Including more recent patient data and updating the model with the most up-to-date
practice insights might help alleviate the problem. According to the author of the [130], federated learning
for an institution/hospital takes several months to develop. Furthermore, obtaining data from electronic
health records(EHR) remains challenging since data is typically dispersed across several databases and
apps.
• Data Leakage Federated learning provides a solution that enhances data privacy, which is a crucial concern
of FL training. However, some work has proposed showing the leakage in federated learning representing
a still unexplored area of research due to several factors that may result in security issues. A quantifiable
method of measuring privacy would enable better choices about the minimum privacy settings required to
sustain clinically acceptable results [37].
• Patient Variability
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
19
Care varies widely between locations, with significant variation in performance across indicators. Hospital
levels could explain more of the observed diversity than clinician levels.
In a study, more than 7,000 cardiovascular patients were treated with adult stem cells [36] However, the
data so far has revealed neutral or minor advantages. One of the most important questions to explore
when thinking about designing better trials is why there is so much variation both across and within trials.
Patients in the FOCUS-CCTRN trial [88] received autologous bone marrow cells to treat chronic ischemic
heart disease. Several cardiac clinical outcomes showed no improvement when compared to placebo. On
the other hand, individual patient outcomes were highly varied [10].
Care variability or uneven care practices has an impact on many elements of healthcare delivery. It can
assist improve patient safety, reducing healthcare expenditures, and improving key performance indicators
(KPIs) for both people and the healthcare system by minimizing variability of care.
3.3
Communication Challenges
• Failure or dropouts during communication While distributed learning conjointly aims at training one
model on multiple servers, a standard underlying assumption is that the native datasets are Identically
Distributed (IID) and roughly have constant size. None of those hypotheses are created for federated
learning; instead, the datasets are usually heterogeneous and their sizes could span over many orders
of magnitude. Moreover, the clients concerned in federated learning could also be unreliable as they’re
subject to a lot of failures or drop out. Some clients’ models do not get included in every FL round due to
interrupted connectivity or slow internet conditions. Those devices or models are called stragglers. [37]
Since the clients usually trust less powerful communication media (i.e. Wi-fi) and powered systems (i.e.
smartphones and IoT devices) compared to distributed learning where nodes are usually data centers that
have powerful procedure capabilities and are connected to at least one another with quick networks.
For an Edge AI task to be accomplished there are multiple communication rounds between edge nodes. Edge
nodes are usually smartphones or devices. Small access to training data is available at every edge node that is
participating in the training. These nodes then perform edge training which results in high communication
costs especially in case of limited bandwidth. [133] The aim of communication in every round is to compute
a certain function value concerning intermediate value at edge devices. The paper points out a challenge of
alleviating communication overheads under privacy and resource constraints and the need of reducing
the communication rounds for training and inference. The paper also introduces communication efficient
methods to achieve efficient results. Communication methods for edge AI at the algorithmic level, zeroth-
order method, first-order method, second-order method, and federated optimizations have been well
illustrated and explained.
• Computational and Communication Overhead
Communication has become one of the primary challenges for federated learning as the wireless networks
and end-user internet connections can potentially become expensive and unreliable soon. [60] mentions
how federated averaging and sparsification and/or quantization of model updates have demonstrated a
significant reduction in communication cost with minimal impact on training accuracy. [27] demonstrates
that employing secure MPC experiments to do privacy-preserving federated genomic data analysis is more
costly than performing the exact computation in a centralized non-encrypted environment.
• Energy consumption while communication
IoT(Internet of Things) involves widespread use of mobile devices involving computing and sensing capabil-
ities which involves a collection of data at a societal scale. Valuable data collection and maintenance backed
with centralized machine learning models entail security and privacy issues leading to less participation of
devices in smart city methods. While the mechanics of privacy preservation in federated learning ensures
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
20
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
the privacy of data is preserved, mobile crowdsensing involves a huge amount of energy consumption.
Federated learning involves on-device training in turn earning leading to high consumption of batteries
from local devices which inturn deters users from participating in the process. For instance, this [54] survey
paper presents the potential of federated learning along with the overview of challenges and issues faced
while incorporating federated learning into smart city sensing.
4
APPLICATION
Applications of FL in Healthcare
Prognosis 
2 Brain data meta analysis..
2 Stroke prevention prediction.
2 Brain tumor segmentation 
2 Multi Modal COVID-19 Diagnosis.
2 Brain Pathology Segmentation.
2 Collaborative drug discovery 
2 Ankylosing spondylitis prediction.
2 Drug sensitivity prediction.
2 Privacy preserving integration of medical 
data 
Diagnosis
Clinical workflow 
Fig. 8. Applications of federated learning in healthcare
4.1
Prognosis
Prognosis is a diagnostic term that refers to assessing the possible or potential progression of an illness, such as
whether the signs and effects will change or worsen (and how quickly) or stay constant over time. The natural
course of the diagnosed illness, the individual’s physical and emotional health, the current medications, and
other considerations are used to make a prognosis. Listed below are healthcare-related applications helping to
perform a prognosis on a particular disease or type of data.
Privacy preserving stroke prevention An investigation into Facebook’s data protection breaches in process-
ing consumer information for uninformed usage has sparked recent data privacy issues. As a result, legislation
such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [Regulation, 2016] has been proposed to prevent organiza-
tions from sharing data without prior user consent. To fix data privacy, they use a new and efficient methodology
called federated learning platform, which allows them to jointly train a machine learning model using data from
multiple clients without directly exchanging data between them. Tencent and WeBank collaborated to create a
privacy-preserving stroke prediction technology. Stroke prevention, as well as the risk factors associated with it,
has long been a public health priority around the world. The scientists and engineers suggest a privacy-preserving
scheme for predicting stroke risk and intend to use cloud servers to deploy the federated prediction model [58].
Meta analysis on brain data In reality, data sharing is limited by the need to migrate vast amounts of biomed-
ical data, as well as the administrative workload that comes with it. Researchers sought an analysis approach
in meta-analysis or federated learning paradigms as a result of this situation. The Enhancing NeuroImaging
Genetics by Meta-Analysis (ENIGMA) consortium is one of the best examples of this kind of research method.
Brain scans of previously unimaginable amounts can be found in data banks all around the world. Due to various
privacy and legal considerations, separate databases held at multiple locations cannot always be exchanged
directly, restricting the use of big data in the study of brain disorders. A Federated learning platform allows
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
21
them to jointly train a machine learning model using data from multiple clients without directly exchanging
data between them. Addressing the issue of privacy and restrictions on sharing the data, the authors propose
a federated learning system for safely accessing and meta-analyzing any biomedical data while maintaining
individual privacy. They demonstrate the framework by using the ENIGMA Shape platform to provide the first
implementation of federated analysis that is consistent with ENIGMA’s standard pipelines [104].
Brain tumor segmentation Classification of electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings and brain tumor
segmentation was difficult due to the need of large datasets [57, 70]. This lack of large datasets has led to the
success of deep learning (DL) methods in the field of Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI). A novel privacy-preserving
DL architecture has been suggested for EEG classification called federated transfer learning (FTL). A test proposed
architecture’s success on the PhysioNet dataset for 2-class motor imagery classification. [57] Demonstrating the
possibility of implementing differential-privacy strategies to secure the patient data in a federated learning setup,
a brain tumor segmentation was performed on the BraTS dataset [70].
Breast density classification[96] For the advancement of clinically relevant models, hospitals and other
academic institutes often need to partner and host centralized databases. Owing to data protection and ethical
issues involved with data sharing in healthcare, this overhead will easily become a technical problem and
typically necessitates a time-consuming approval process. And if these issues are overcome, data is precious, and
organizations may choose not to exchange complete datasets. In a real-world collaborative environment, the use
of federated learning (FL) to create a medical imaging classification model was demonstrated bringing together
seven health organizations from around the world to train a model for breast density classification focused on
Breast Imaging, Reporting, and Data System (BIRADS) [96].
Multi-Disease Chest X-ray classification
Deep learning approaches can yield important results in medical imaging analysis, although they involve
a large volume of high-quality data. Since a client cannot have enough data to train and construct a quality
model, working with multiple clients may address data insufficiency problems in deep learning but add privacy
restrictions. This paper [77] proposes a federated deep learning method for multi-disease classification from
chest X-rays, with pneumonia as an example. The FDL technique measures pneumonia from a chest X-ray and
distinguishes between viral and bacterial pneumonia. Clients train local models with minimal private data at the
edge server and send them to the central server for global aggregation without sending the chest-X-ray images
to a central server [8].
Adverse Drug Reaction prediction
Since healthcare data is scattered, collecting a sufficiently comprehensive dataset to track rare cases entails
combining data from various data silos. Analyses derived from various data sources may be contradictory or
inaccurate, necessitating the use of tools to properly aggregate the information. A time lag exists between
the ADR (adverse drug reaction) case, claim filing, adjudication, and claim consolidation into a database of
current claims-based systems. As a result, there is an unmet need for reliable, flexible, and effective methods
for forecasting ADRs using distributed health data while maintaining patient privacy. Since healthcare data
is dispersed, assembling a robust dataset to document unusual events necessitates merging data from several
data silos. To address the issue a federated learning-based system has been proposed, which allows health data
to be shared across several platforms. Without ever transferring the raw data from their respective pages, the
architecture helps one to train a global model based on each site’s local data. It is the first time federated machine
learning algorithms have been used to forecast ADRs using distributed electronic health data [24].
Predictions on SARS-COV-2 chest X Rays
Confidential data all pose realistic difficulties when using electronic health data to forecast adverse drug
reactions (ADR). Another example where there is a need for data collaboration is within clinical and science
communities. When adapting to rapidly changing and pervasive environmental threats, the pandemic has
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
22
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
highlighted the importance of quickly conducting data collaborations. One recent work on an AI-based SARS-
COV-2 Clinical Decision Support (CDS) algorithm is a concrete example of these forms of partnerships. Another
example is during the SARS-COV-2 pandemic, 20 institutes partnered on a healthcare FL study that used vital
signs, laboratory results, and chest x-rays to predict possible oxygen needs of infected patients, resulting in the
“EXAM” (EMR CXR AI Model) [37].
GWAS analysis on genomic datasets
The biomedical community benefits from the growing availability of genomic data for scientific studies,
such as Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS). However, high-quality GWAS typically necessitates a large
number of tests, which may exceed a single institution’s ability. Concerns regarding patient safety and clinical
knowledge security arise from federated genomic data analysis (as data are being exchanged across institutional
boundaries). On federated genomic databases, a privacy-preserving GWAS architecture. has been proposed where
computations are layered on top of stable multi-party computation (MPC) structures [27].
NeuroLOG A creation of a framework OntoNeuroLOG was implemented by federating five neuroimaging
data repositories in Paris, Rennes, Grenoble, and Sophia Antipolis. The creation of the framework OntoNeuroLOG
and its use to confirm heterogeneous data to a standard model are the main features of this work. The project
focuses on research implementations that need a multi-center, multi-disciplinary approach: 1) epilepsy (surgical
treatment of drug-resistant epilepsy) and 2) neurodegenerative disorders (Alzheimer’s disease) [40]
4.2
Diagnosis
The description of the type and origin of a certain phenomenon is referred to as diagnosis. Diagnosis is used
in many different fields to assess "cause and effect," with differences in the application of logic, analytics, and
practice. Listed below are healthcare-related applications helping to perform a diagnosis on a particular disease or
type of data such as drug discovery, COVID-19 prediction at the edge, and the use of EHRs to improve mortality
prediction.
COVID-19 diagnosis at the edge
COVID-19 has been a major focus of research in 2020, especially after the World Health Organization (WHO)
declared it a pandemic in March, with various activities focused on diagnosis, prevention, and the production
of a possible vaccine. Risk identification [84], touch monitoring, false news identification, emotion analysis,
and screening and diagnosis are some of the main applications of data science approaches, especially machine
learning and data visualization techniques, in the international response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite
major advancements in recent years, cloud-based healthcare systems appear to be underutilized due to their
shortcomings in meeting rigorous protection, privacy, and quality of service criteria (such as low latency). The
authors take advantage of edge computing’s capabilities in medicine by exploring and testing the ability of
intelligent analysis of clinical visual data linked to COVID19 at the edge. They also enable remote healthcare
centers to benefit from a multi-modal shared learning model without having to share any knowledge about the
local data’s modality or the data itself. The authors suggest a CFL-based collective learning system for the role of
COVID19 diagnosis with visual evidence such as X-rays, Ultrasound images, and CT Scans, based on an emerging
idea of clustered federated learning (CFL) [91]
Estimation of blood pressure
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), chronic heart disease was the leading cause of death from
2000 to 2019, accounting for 16% of all global deaths in 2019. During this time, most deaths have been caused by
heart disease. This not only has a significant impact on the lives of those involved but also on public healthcare
services. Electrocardiogram (ECG) and blood pressure (BP) readings are widely used by clinicians to consider the
dynamics between the healthy and dysfunctional core. These methods are also very invasive, particularly when
continuous arterial blood pressure (ABP) readings are taken, and they are often quite expensive. To address the
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
23
problem, the authors present a decentralized learning approach to continuous ABP calculation that is capable of
large-scale real-world deployment while protecting patient privacy. This architecture, to their knowledge, is the
first example of a GAN capable of continuous ABP generation from an input PPG signal and using a federated
learning methodology [14].
Data Variability in Medical Imaging
Deep learning has made rapid strides in image recognition and target detection in recent years. These ad-
vancements have also led to improvements in automating clinical processes within medical imaging, thanks
to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) pattern recognition abilities. Deep CNNs, for example, has paved
the way for breakthroughs in retinopathy diagnosis, lung nodule identification, and brain tumor segmentation.
Insufficient patient data makes it difficult to train deep learning models for medical applications, particularly for
rare diseases. Efforts to share patient data are often hampered by legal, technological, and privacy issues. The
current implementation of CWT has a major flaw in that it isn’t designed to accommodate differences in sample
sizes, mark distributions, resolution, and acquisition settings in training data through organizations. The authors
[7] present CWT modifications to reduce output losses caused by heterogeneity in training sample sizes and mark
ranges through academic training splits, and test the effectiveness of their changes on virtual dispersed tasks
for (DR) identification and irregular chest radiograph classification. This is the first research to show that data
heterogeneity in training sample sizes and mark distributions across institutions can cause distributed learning
models for medical imaging to perform poorly [7].
A federated network for translational cancer research
Obtaining adequate quantities of annotated human tissues remains a major barrier to translational cancer
science, which is needed to move cancer treatment closer to precision medicine. Major new bridging infrastruc-
tures, including more functional biorepositories that connect human tissue to clinical phenotypes and outcomes,
are required for advancements in cancer science and personalized medicine. Cancer researchers have been at
the forefront of creating biomedical data and resource sharing consortia, but they have traditionally relied on
centralized structures in which a single organization serves as a middleman between requesting researchers and
participating institutions. The downside of centralization is that as the number of organizations grows, it becomes
precarious. The TIES (Text Information Extraction System) Cancer Research Network was established by four
cancer centers as a federated network that allows member organizations to share data and biospecimen.[53]
mentions pathology data that has been de-identified and analyzed with the TIES natural language processing
framework can be accessed by member sites, resulting in a pool of rich phenotype data linked to clinical biospeci-
mens. The possible effect of federated quests around the network on translational science can be seen in studies
involving rare diseases, uncommon phenotypes, and complex biological behaviors. The network meets many
main criteria, including local data and credentialing power, the inclusion of rich phenotype data, and applicability
to a wide range of study goals [53].
Multi-site fMRI analysis
Data has a “non-rivalrous” value, which means it can be used by several parties at the same time to produce
new data items or services, according to economics literature, Data pooling would have a synergistic impact.
Sharing vast volumes of medical data is critical for precision medicine, with functional MRI (fMRI) data relating
to certain neurological conditions or disorders being an interesting example. Deep learning models have shown to
be useful in a variety of functions, including neuroimage processing. However, to successfully train a high-quality
deep learning algorithm, a large volume of patient data must be gathered. The time and cost of acquiring and
annotating massive fMRI datasets, for example, make it impossible to obtain a large number at a single location.
The authors of the paper[71] use a privacy-preserving approach to solve the issue of multi-site fMRI classification.
They suggest a federated learning approach to solve the problem, in which a decentralized iterative optimization
algorithm is used and mutual local model weights are changed by a randomization mechanism. Overall, the
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
24
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
findings show that using multi-site data without exchanging data can improve neuroimage analysis accuracy and
help discover accurate disease-related biomarkers [71].
Patch-Based Surface Morphometry for Alzheimer’s Disease
In hospitals and academic centers, unprecedented rates of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) currently
exist. Simultaneously, the rapid advancement of software and hardware has made it scientifically possible to
extract useful knowledge about the underpinnings of brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease from these
combined databases (AD). Researchers have faced significant challenges in obtaining or sharing these details due
to patient safety issues, data limitations, and legal complications. To address this issue, large-scale collaborative
networks, such as the ENIGMA Consortium1, were established, which used secure meta-analyses to study
data from hundreds of institutions around the world without sharing patients’ scans or protected information.
Seeking major causal factors that may predict/relate to health conditions or cognitive function, such as finding
anatomically irregular regions in the brains of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients, is more interesting in brain
imaging studies. As a result, the authors suggest a novel federated feature selection scheme based on group
lasso regression using patch-based surface morphometry features from T1-weighted brain MRI images of AD,
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and stable elderly test subjects. By deliberately choosing (and visualizing)
core functions, their work generalizes and enriches federated learning science. The method can discover new
important features to be used as imaging biomarkers of MCI and AD by expanding access to information from
large imaging datasets [118].
FADL: Federated-Autonomous Deep Learning for Distributed Electronic Health Record
Data from electronic health records (EHRs), patient-generated health data from mobile devices, and other
health-related information are useful for optimizing health outcomes, especially in precision medicine. Healthcare
records are kept in various locations and data silos, such as clinics, pharmacies, payors, and mobile computers.
Traditionally, healthcare data are disseminated through several locations and consolidated in a network for review.
However, due to stringent rules and the sensitivity of the results, healthcare data transfers are complicated. These
impediments not only make data usage costly, but also slow down knowledge delivery in healthcare, where
timely changes are often needed. Using ICU data from 58 independent hospitals, the authors[72] demonstrate
that machine learning models used to forecast patient mortality can be trained effectively without taking health
data out of silos using a distributed machine learning approach. They suggest a new approach called Federated-
Autonomous Deep Learning (FADL), which trains a portion of the algorithm using data from all data sources in a
distributed manner and another portion using data from individual data sources [72].
Clinical trial protocol optimization
Clinical science is a time-consuming, labor-intensive, and expensive undertaking. Specific challenges associated
with these bottlenecks include problems assessing patient demographics, determining eligible patients for
enrollment, optimizing procedures, manual and inefficient data collection, data source reliability, and the difficulty
of recognizing and monitoring infrequent adverse incidents. Furthermore, there are workflow problems and
bottlenecks that hinder clinical trial behavior, such as suboptimal research design, slow and lengthy patient
registration, site selection, and procedure optimization, all of which contribute to time and cost requirements.
Some of these problems, such as protocol optimization and patient selection, can be mitigated by prudent re-use
of data found in Electronic Health Records (EHRs). The growing use of EHRs in Europe and elsewhere provides a
large, rich, and highly important pool of health data that has the potential to enhance clinical trial delivery. This
data may be used to assess clinical trial viability using computable representations of the parameters, improve
patient identification, clinical trial execution, and adverse effect monitoring. The authors in [25] investigated the
concerns by examining the Inclusion and Exclusion (I/E) criteria of 23 completed trials in a variety of therapeutic
areas that were sponsored by seven pharmaceutical companies to determine the proportion of I/E criteria that
could be represented in a computable format and the right to query hospital EHRs to determine the number of
currently qualifying patients correctly [25].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
25
Heart Disease predictions from Electronic Health Records
In the age of "big data," computationally efficient and privacy-aware solutions for large-scale machine learning
problems are critical, especially in the healthcare context, where large volumes of data are processed in several
locations and owned by various institutions. The authors here discuss three issues concerning healthcare data:
(1) data exist in several places (e.g., clinics, physicians’ offices, home-based computers, patients’ smartphones); (2)
data access is increasing, necessitating the use of scalable frameworks; and (3) aggregating data in a centralized
database is infeasible or impractical due to size and/or data protection issues. Based on their medical histories
as outlined in their Electronic Health Records, the authors create a distributed (federated) approach to forecast
hospitalizations for patients with heart diseases within a target year (EHRs). They devise a federated optimization
scheme (cPDS) to address the sparse Support Vector Machine problem. they apply their latest approach to a
dataset of de-identified Electronic Cardiac Records from the Boston Medical Center, which includes patients with
heart disorders [13].
4.3
Clinical Workflow
Clinical workflow is often conducted to optimize consistency in the workflow, analyze current frameworks,
research a process and its implementation, and so on. The health care applications mentioned below conduct
or include a clinical workflow on a specific disease, analysis on drug sensitivity, an EHR linking platform, and
cloud-based output of federated learning on EHR’s obtained from two healthcare systems to predict the risks of
diseases linked to tobacco and radon.
FedMed: A Federated Learning Framework for Language Modelling
Society is entering a smart age, with the latest breakthroughs of the modern technological revolution—Industry
4.0 and Internet of Things (IoT) technologies—where all items are enclosed with a network of interconnectivity
and automation through intelligent digital technique. Meanwhile, edging systems are flooded with heterogeneous
data, ranging from real-time sensor activity logs to consumer data. During the migration process, however, data
is quickly attacked and poisoned. This increases the difficulty of machine learning. The emergence of federated
learning techniques, as well as the obstacles and risks it poses, has occurred in recent years. Traditional FL
strategies depend on averaging aggregation or don’t take into account connectivity costs. The authors suggest a
novel Federated Mediation (FedMed) paradigm with adaptive aggregation, mediation reward system, and topK
strategy to solve concept aggregation and coordination costs in federated language modeling. Perplexity and
contact rounds are used to test the results. Three datasets are used in the experiments (i.e., Penn Treebank,
WikiText-2, and Yelp) [118]
Federated learning on clinical benchmark data
FL may be used to address privacy concerns and reduce the possibility of a data violation in clinical records so
data transfer and centralization are not necessary. Since medical data is among the most vulnerable forms of
personal data, privacy protection is especially important for medical data processing. De-identification techniques
have traditionally been used to protect patients’ privacy. A performance evaluation using federated learning on
clinical benchmark data was performed. The Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST)
dataset, Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care-III (MIMIC-III) dataset, and PhysioNet Electrocardiogram
(ECG) dataset were used in a federated learning analysis. By changing the MNIST, MIMIC-III, and ECG datasets,
they also validated FL in environments that simulate real-world data distributions [65].
Identifying potential risk variants in ankylosing spondylitis
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been common for detecting possible risk variants in a variety
of diseases. Large sample size is usually needed for a statistically significant GWAS to identify disease-associated
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). A single institution, on the other hand, normally only has a small
number of samples. As a result, cross-institutional collaboration is expected to maximize sample size and statistical
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
26
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
capacity. However, cross-institutional collaborations present serious problems, one of which is data protection.
While data sharing within a broad network can greatly support biomedical science, it also poses potential threats to
data privacy due to the exchanging of personal information about individuals. The consequences of patient private
information leaks include, but are not limited to, workplace discrimination, denial of benefits, higher insurance
premiums, and so on. To address the problems of data privacy due to the exchange of personal information,
the authors suggest a novel privacy-preserving federated GWAS architecture (iPRIVATES). iPRIVATES, which
includes privacy-preserving federated processing, allows various organizations to collaborate on GWAS analysis
without disclosing patient-level genotyping results [119].
Drug sensitivity prediction
Users with a personalized recommendation framework face a conundrum: learning from data will boost
recommendations, but only when other users can share their private anonymization. Good personalized forecasts
are critical in precision medicine, but the genetic knowledge from which the predictions are based is often
especially vulnerable since it clearly describes the patients and therefore cannot be conveniently anonymized.
Genomics is a critical domain for privacy-aware modeling, especially in precision medicine. Many people like
to keep their and their descendants’ genomes secret, but basic anonymization is insufficient since a genome is
inherently recognizable. As a result, the hospital or clinic that holds the genomic data must be very vigilant about
privacy concerns when disclosing the genomic data, even though the data is required and helpful for potential
diagnosis and care decisions. Even with moderate-sized data, the proposed differentially private regression
approach [48] combines the theoretical appeal and asymptotic efficiency with good prediction accuracy. Under
comparatively strict differential privacy assurances, their approach exceeds the predictive precision of state-of-
the-art non-private lasso regression with just 4x more tests [48].
Integration of Medical Data
Medical evidence is often maintained by many organizations. However, comprehensive evaluations can
necessitate the integration of these datasets without jeopardizing patient or commercial privacy. An effective
privacy-preserving algorithm, Multiparty Private Set Intersection (MPSI), computes the intersection of several
private datasets. Multiparty Private Set Intersection (MPSI), computes the intersection of several private datasets
using this, the authors suggest a functional MPSI with the following characteristics: the size of each party’s
datasets is independent of that of the other parties, and the statistical complexity for each party is independent of
the number of parties [79].
Design and implementation of EHRs
Electronic clinical evidence has increased dramatically as a result of healthcare laws and government incentives
encouraging the use of Electronic Health Records (EHRs). As a result, academics and public health authorities
have shown a growing interest in data linkage that can be used in cross-site health studies. Linking EHR data
through healthcare agencies, on the other hand, necessitates striking a balance between data accessibility and
privacy. Some regions have adopted health information exchange (HIE) programs to provide healthcare facilities
with up-to-date clinical data on patients through hospitals for better and more organized treatment, as part of
inter-institutional arrangements for the sharing of PHI. However, owing to concerns about reliability, anonymity,
and protection, as well as other problems, organizational HIEs exchanging patient-level identifiers, are still
not commonly used. The authors define a real-world implementation of a software framework (Distributed
Common Identity for the Integration of Regional Health Data – DCIFIRHD) that uses a structured and distributed
encryption algorithm to conduct stable, cross-site aggregation and linking of EHR data for analysis. As part of
the HealthLNK study initiative, they applied the application in a major metropolitan area (Chicago, IL, USA),
aggregating over 5 million patients’ clinical records through six healthcare institutions [62].
Cloud-based FL
From diagnosis to medication decisions, machine learning (ML) models can improve health care. However, ML
model generalizability is jeopardized due to a lack of adequate heterogeneous data due to patient privacy concerns.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
27
When compared to a simulation in a single organization, heterogeneous data from multiple centers increased
model accuracy. Furthermore, cloud systems come equipped with the required tools and security measures
to support federated learning deployments. The amount and quality of data used to train an ML algorithm
are extremely important, particularly for more complex models. The availability of diverse multidimensional
patient data sets in the age of precision medicine necessitates greater population surveys for generalization.
Furthermore, data shortage of underrepresented communities may contribute to prejudices if training data does
not adequately portray these populations’ characteristics. Quality of healthcare data and algorithmic problems
are also well-known ML roadblocks. To assess the federated machine learning solution, the authors use electronic
health record data from two academic medical centers on a Microsoft Azure Cloud Databricks network to test
various federated learning applications in both a virtual and real-world setting. Using data from two healthcare
systems’ electronic health records (EHRs), they trained machine learning models to forecast the risks of diseases
linked to tobacco and radon [94].
Clinical decision support system
Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) are computer-based applications designed to improve patient care and
healthcare delivery by assisting clinicians in analyzing health information better and enhancing medical decisions.
[61, 107] A CDSS uses knowledge management to get clinical insights from the patient and health-related data
based on multiple factors. Clinical decision support systems assist the clinicians at the time of care and help to
make a better care plan [3, 12].
CDSS comprises three main components, including Base, inference engine, and Communication Mechanism.
The base can be classified into two types of systems called knowledge-based and non-knowledge-based.
Knowledge-based support systems are defined by well-established rules(IF-THEN statements) that determine
’what is true?’. Support systems without a knowledge base, on the other hand, answer the question "what to do?"
advising on the next steps for treatments, which drug to prescribe, etc. These systems still require a data source
and use artificial intelligence (AI), statistical pattern recognition, or machine learning (ML) to make medical
decisions and provide recommendations [6, 41, 112].
A large amount of data is often required to train an AI system, but clinical data’s varied and sensitive aspects
present a barrier to the standard centralized network. The author of the paper [110] proposed a deep learning-
based clinical decision support system trained and managed under a federated learning paradigm to solve the data
and privacy challenges. The paper utilized a novel strategy to ensure the safety of patient privacy and overcome
the risk of cyberattacks while enabling large-scale clinical data mining.
Table 2: Summary of existing studies on Deployment of ML and FL in Healthcare since 2016
Distributed learning: Developing a pre-
dictive model based on data from mul-
tiple hospitals without data leaving the
hospital – A real life proof of concept
[56]
Bayesian network
EHR
2016
5
287
Developing and Validating a Survival
Prediction Model for NSCLC Patients
Through Distributed Learning Across 3
Countries
[55]
SVM
EHR
2017
3
894
Title
Ref
ML Model
Data Type Year #Hospitals/clients #Samples
Continued on next page
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
28
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Table 2: Summary of existing studies on Deployment of ML and FL in Healthcare since 2016 (Continued)
Patient clustering improves efficiency of
federated machine learning to predict
mortality and hospital stay time using
distributed electronic medical records
[50]
k-means
EHR
2019
208
200,859
Distributed learning on 20 000+ lung can-
cer patients – The Personal Health Train
[31]
Logistic regression
EHR
2020
8
23,203
Federated Learning of Electronic Health
Records Improves Mortality Prediction
in Patients Hospitalized with COVID-19
[111]
Federated MLP,LASSO
EHR
2020
5
4029
Joint Imaging Platform for Federated
Clinical Data Analytics
[100]
CNN based organ segmentation
Images
2020
10
-
Stochastic
Channel-Based
Federated
Learning With Neural Network Pruning
for Medical Data Privacy Preservation:
Model Development and Experimental
Validation
[101]
MLP
EHR
2020
5
30,760
Federated learning in medicine: facili-
tating multi-institutional collaborations
without sharing patient data
[102]
U-Net
Images
2020
13
352
Federated semi-supervised learning for
COVID region segmentation in chest CT
using multi-national data from China,
Italy, Japan
[126] Fully Convolutional Network (FCN)
Images
2021
3
1704
Real-Time Electronic Health Record Mor-
tality Prediction During the COVID-19
Pandemic: A Prospective Cohort Study
[106]
Stacked regression model
EHR
2021
12
28,538
Federated Learning used for predicting
outcomes in SARS-COV-2 patients
[38]
ResNet-34
Images
2021
20
16,148
Cloud-Based Federated Learning Imple-
mentation Across Medical Centers
[94]
ANN / Logistic regression
EHR
2021
2
10,000
Federated learning improves site perfor-
mance in multicenter deep learning with-
out data sharing
[99]
3D Anisotropic Hybrid Network
Images
2021
3
300
Title
Ref
ML Model
Data Type Year #Hospitals/clients #Samples
5
TOOLS
5.1
TensorFlow Federated
TFF [109] is an open-source framework to perform machine learning and computations on localized information.
TFF allows developers to simulate federated learning algorithms on the models and data. TFF’s interfaces are
unionized in 2 layers. Federate Core(FC) and Federate Learning (FL) APIs.Federated Core API is the foundation
layer upon which is built the Federated Learning API. This is a strong functional programming environment
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
29
Leaf FL 
IBM Federated Learning 
FedML
Clara Training Framework 
Tensorflow Federated 
PySyft 
Paddle FL 
FATE
Federated Learning tools 
Fig. 9. Tools of federated learning
that involves a combination of novel federated learning algorithms and TensorFlow with distributing higher-
revelations operators at the core of the system. Whereas Federated learning API is at a higher-level interface. This
API allows developers to use the existing FL algorithms (training and evaluation) in their models. Developers can
incorporate their functions and interfaces within the federated heart. FC, as a Python package, includes Python
interfaces that can be used to create new Python features. It supports several styles, including Tensor types,
sequence types, tuple types, and function types, to make it simple to use, particularly for developers familiar
with TensorFlow. It supports a wide range of federated operators, including federated sum, federated minimize,
and federated broadcast.
TFF currently only supports FedAvg and does not provide any privacy mechanisms. It can now only be deployed
on a single computer, with the federated setting applied by simulation.
5.2
Federated AI Technology Enabler (FATE)
Webank’s AI Department initiated an open-source project called FATE [35]. This framework provides a secure
computing framework supporting the AI Ecosystem. It uses privacy-preserving techniques like Homomorphic
encryption and Secured Multi-Party Computation. It also supports ML algorithms like Logistic regression,
Deep learning, tree-based algorithms, and transfer learning. EggRoll, FederatedML, FATE-Flow, FATE-Serving,
FATE-Board, and KubeFATE are its six main modules.
The federated algorithms and stable protocols are used in FederatedML. It currently supports training a variety of
machine learning models, including NNs, GBDTs, and logistic regression, in both horizontal and vertical federated
settings. To ensure anonymity, it also incorporates safe multi-party computing and homomorphic encryption. To
run an FL algorithm, users simply set the parameters. FATE also includes comprehensive documentation of how
to deploy and use it.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
30
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Practitioners must change FATE’s source code to incorporate their federated algorithms because FATE has
algorithm-level interfaces. Non-expert consumers would find this difficult.
5.3
PySyft
PySyft [97] is a secure and private deep learning library. It is a library for answering questions using data
you cannot see. It uses privacy-preserving techniques like Differential Privacy, Homomorphic Encryption, and
multi-party computation with deep learning frameworks like Pytorch, and Tensorflow.
Both PyTorch and TensorFlow can be used with PySyft. It can be installed on a single computer or several
computers, with the WebSocket API used to communicate between clients.
Though PySyft offers several tutorials, there is no comprehensive documentation on the system’s interfaces or
architecture. PySyft does not support a diversified computing paradigm like on-device training on Mobile or IoT.
5.4
Leaf
LEAF [64] is a benchmarking framework for studying in federated settings, with programs consisting of federated
learning, multi-task mastering, meta-learning, and on-tool learning.
It includes six databases that cover a variety of topics, such as image recognition, emotion analysis, and
next-character prediction. A collection of utilities is given to split datasets into separate parties in an IID or
non-IID manner. A reference implementation is also presented for each dataset to explain how to use the dataset
in a training phase.
Leaf databases have enough clients to model cross-device FL scenarios, but they may be too limited for questions
where size is especially relevant. It only supports standardized algorithm implementations such as Fed Avg and
does not support decentralized federated learning, split learning, and vertical federated learning.
5.5
Paddle FL
Paddle FL [83] provides applications in Natural Language Processing, Computer Vision, and recommendation
systems. Paddle FL allowing the deployment of federated learning systems in the form of distributed clusters at a
large scale has been proven to be of great benefit to developers. PaddleFL is an open-source framework based on
PaddlePaddle.
FL methods, user-specified models and algorithms, distributed training setup, and FL task generator are all
included in the compile time. The horizontal FL algorithms, such as FedAvg, are among the FL techniques. Users
are allowed to create their models and training algorithms in addition to the FL techniques offered.
PaddleFL is still in its early stages of production, and the documentation and samples are lacking. It also lacks
in performance with standardized benchmarks such as Model DNN (eg: ResNet) and vertical federated learning.
Paddle FL does not involve a flexible and generic API design with topology customization and flexible message
flow.
5.6
Clara Training Framework
Clara Train SDK [26] is a domain-optimized developer software framework that consists of APIs for AI-Assisted
Annotation. This allows any clinical viewer to be AI successful and allows a TensorFlow-based framework with
pre-skilled models to begin AI improvement with strategies including Transfer Learning, Federated Learning,
and AutoML.
Developers may use the Clara Train SDK’s configurable MMAR (Medical Model ARchive) function to carry
their models and components to conduct Federated Learning, as well as monitor whether the local training is run
on a single GPU or multiple GPUs.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
31
5.7
Fed ML
FedML [46] serves as a tool for federated learning as well as a forum for FL benchmarking. Its core structure is
split into two layers as an FL system. On-device training for IoT and mobile computers, distributed computing,
and single-machine emulation are all supported. FedML also embraces a variety of algorithms, prototypes, and
databases for study variability (e.g., decentralized learning, vertical FL, and split learning).
FedML offers a simulation environment for a wide range of hardware specifications while supporting three
computing paradigms [46]: standalone simulation, distributed computing, and on-device training.
5.8
IBM Federated Learning
A python framework library for distributed machine learning processes in an enterprise environment [52].IBM
Federated Learning focuses on enterprise environments where safe rollout, failure tolerance, and fast model
specification are critical; these must make use of existing machine learning libraries that enable enterprise users to
access a robust collection of state-of-the-art algorithms without learning new languages. Enterprise professionals
will be able to easily implement federated learning using IBM Federated Learning.
Apart from neural networks and decision trees, IBM Federated Learning facilitates the learning of a variety of
machine learning models such as multi-class classification,regression,linear classifiers and adaptation of XGBoost.
IBM Federated Learning also gives you the ability to apply differential privacy to a variety of models, from basic
Naive Bayes to more sophisticated differential privacy structures like those used in neural networks.
6
CONCLUSION & FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Federated learning is a learning paradigm where machine learning models are trained at the edge. It was
originally designed for a variety of domains, including mobile and edge device use cases, but it has recently
acquired popularity in healthcare applications.
The development of federated learning systems for healthcare has sparked a lot of interest from both industry
and academics. As a result, a comprehensive overview and summary of existing FLSs in the healthcare domain is
required.
Not all technological concerns have been solved, and FL will undoubtedly be a focus of study in the coming
decade. Even though 5G networks are not yet widely available and commercially implemented worldwide,
significant research and development efforts have been directed toward future 6G wireless systems.[29]
Future research will focus on incorporating FL functionalities into future 5G/6G medical devices, how to use 6G
devices, such as intelligent implants and wearables, for large-scale FL-based healthcare, and what new healthcare
services 6G enables. Future e-health services, for example, will be enhanced by AI and FL capabilities, improving
patient quality of life and lowering hospitalizations [81].
In this article, we presented an overview of federated learning in the healthcare industry. We conducted
a comprehensive survey of recent work in the healthcare sector, with a focus on federated settings. We also
discussed how to employ federated learning in healthcare, as well as the methods, applications, and issues that
come with it.
REFERENCES
[1] Nabil Adam, Tom White, Basit Shafiq, Jaideep Vaidya, and Xiaoyun He. 2007. Privacy preserving integration of health care data. AMIA
... Annual Symposium proceedings. AMIA Symposium (10 2007), 1—5. https://europepmc.org/articles/PMC2655922
[2] Mete Akgün, A. Osman Bayrak, Bugra Ozer, and M. Şamil Sağıroğlu. 2015. Privacy preserving processing of genomic data: A survey.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics 56 (2015), 103–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2015.05.022
[3] Abeer Y Al-Hyari, Ahmad M Al-Taee, and Majid A Al-Taee. 2013. Clinical decision support system for diagnosis and management of
chronic renal failure. In 2013 IEEE Jordan Conference on Applied Electrical Engineering and Computing Technologies (AEECT). IEEE, 1–6.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
32
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
[4] Mohammad Al-Rubaie and J. Morris Chang. 2019. Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning: Threats and Solutions. IEEE Security &
Privacy 17 (3 2019). Issue 2. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSEC.2018.2888775
[5] Scott Alfeld, Xiaojin Zhu, and Paul Barford. 2016. Data Poisoning Attacks against Autoregressive Models. Proceedings of the Thirtieth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1452–1458.
[6] Mirza Mansoor Baig, Hamid Gholam Hosseini, and Maria Lindén. 2016. Machine learning-based clinical decision support system for
early diagnosis from real-time physiological data. In 2016 IEEE region 10 conference (TENCON). IEEE, 2943–2946.
[7] N Balachandar, Ken Chang, J Kalpathy-Cramer, and D Rubin. 2020. Accounting for data variability in multi-institutional distributed
deep learning for medical imaging. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA (2020).
[8] Sourasekhar Banerjee, Rajiv Misra, Mukesh Prasad, Erik Elmroth, and Monowar H. Bhuyan. 2020. Multi-diseases Classification from
Chest-X-ray: A Federated Deep Learning Approach. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64984-5_1
[9] Nuria Rodríguez Barroso, Goran Stipcich, Daniel Jiménez-López, José Antonio Ruiz-Millán, Eugenio Martínez-Cámara, Gerardo
González-Seco, M. Victoria Luzón, Miguel Ángel Veganzones, and Francisco Herrera. 2020. Federated Learning and Differential Privacy:
Software tools analysis, the Sherpa.ai FL framework and methodological guidelines for preserving data privacy. CoRR abs/2007.00914
(2020). arXiv:2007.00914 https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.00914
[10] Sarah Beachy, Theresa M. Wizemann, and Meredith Hackmann. 2019. Exploring Sources of Variability Related to the Clinical Translation
of Regenerative Engineering Products.
[11] Battista Biggio, Blaine Nelson, and Pavel Laskov. 2013. Poisoning Attacks against Support Vector Machines. arXiv:1206.6389 [cs.LG]
[12] Tiffani J Bright, Anthony Wong, Ravi Dhurjati, Erin Bristow, Lori Bastian, Remy R Coeytaux, Gregory Samsa, Vic Hasselblad, John W
Williams, Michael D Musty, et al. 2012. Effect of clinical decision-support systems: a systematic review. Annals of internal medicine 157,
1 (2012), 29–43.
[13] Theodora S Brisimi, R Chen, T Mela, A Olshevsky, I Paschalidis, and Wei Shi. 2018. Federated learning of predictive models from
federated Electronic Health Records. International journal of medical informatics 112 (2018), 59–67.
[14] Eoin Brophy, M Vos, Geraldine Boylan, and T Ward. 2021. Estimation of Continuous Blood Pressure from PPG via a Federated Learning
Approach. ArXiv abs/2102.12245 (2021).
[15] Robert Carlsson. 2020. Privacy-Preserved Federated Learning: A survey of applicable machine learning algorithms in a federated
environment.
[16] Dongchul Cha, MinDong Sung, and Yu-Rang Park. 2021. Implementing Vertical Federated Learning Using Autoencoders: Practical
Application, Generalizability, and Utility Study. JMIR Medical Informatics 9 (6 2021). Issue 6. https://doi.org/10.2196/26598
[17] Di Chai, Leye Wang, Kai Chen, and Qiang Yang. 2019. Secure Federated Matrix Factorization.
[18] Di Chai, Leye Wang, Kai Chen, and Qiang Yang. 2020. FedEval: A Benchmark System with a Comprehensive Evaluation Model for
Federated Learning. arXiv:2011.09655 [cs.LG]
[19] Kamalika Chaudhuri, A Sarwate, and Kaushik Sinha. 2013. A near-optimal algorithm for differentially-private principal components.
ArXiv abs/1207.2812 (2013).
[20] Yang Chen, Xiaoyan Sun, and Yaochu Jin. 2020. Communication-Efficient Federated Deep Learning With Layerwise Asynchronous
Model Update and Temporally Weighted Aggregation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 31 (10 2020). Issue
10. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2953131
[21] Yiqiang Chen, Jindong Wang, Chaohui Yu, Wen Gao, and Xin Qin. 2021. FedHealth: A Federated Transfer Learning Framework for
Wearable Healthcare. (2021). arXiv:1907.09173 [cs.LG]
[22] Kewei Cheng, Tao Fan, Yilun Jin, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Qiang Yang. 2019. SecureBoost: A Lossless Federated Learning
Framework. ArXiv abs/1901.08755 (2019).
[23] Prateek Chhikara, Prabhjot Singh, Rajkumar Tekchandani, Neeraj Kumar, and Mohsen Guizani. 2021. Federated Learning Meets
Human Emotions: A Decentralized Framework for Human–Computer Interaction for IoT Applications. IEEE Internet of Things Journal
8 (4 2021). Issue 8. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3037207
[24] Olivia Choudhury, Yoonyoung Park, Theodoros Salonidis, A Gkoulalas-Divanis, I Sylla, and Amar K Das. 2019. Predicting Adverse
Drug Reactions on Distributed Health Data using Federated Learning. AMIA ... Annual Symposium proceedings. AMIA Symposium 2019
(2019), 313–322.
[25] B Claerhout, D Kalra, C Mueller, Gurparkash Singh, N Ammour, L Meloni, J Blomster, M Hopley, G Kafatos, Almenia Garvey, Peter
Kuhn, Martine Lewi, B Vannieuwenhuyse, Benoît Marchal, K Mayer-Patel, Christoph Schindler, and M Sundgren. 2019. Federated
electronic health records research technology to support clinical trial protocol optimization: Evidence from EHR4CR and the InSite
platform. Journal of biomedical informatics 90 (2019), 103090.
[26] Clara. 2019. NVIDIA Clara. https://docs.nvidia.com/clara/ (2019).
[27] Scott D Constable, Y Tang, Shuang Wang, Xiaoqian Jiang, and S Chapin. 2015. Privacy-preserving GWAS analysis on federated genomic
datasets. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 15 (2015), S2 – S2.
[28] Jianfei Cui, He Zhu, Hao Deng, Ziwei Chen, and Dianbo Liu. 2021. FeARH: Federated machine learning with anonymous random
hybridization on electronic medical records. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 117 (5 2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103735
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
33
[29] Chamitha de Alwis, Anshuman Kalla, Quoc-Viet Pham, Pardeep Kumar, Kapal Dev, Won-Joo Hwang, and Madhusanka Liyanage.
2021. Survey on 6G Frontiers: Trends, Applications, Requirements, Technologies and Future Research. IEEE Open Journal of the
Communications Society 2 (2021), 836–886.
[30] Jeffrey Dean, Greg Corrado, Rajat Monga, Kai Chen, Matthieu Devin, Mark Mao, Marc aurelio Ranzato, Andrew Senior, Paul
Tucker, Ke Yang, Quoc Le, and Andrew Ng. 2012. Large Scale Distributed Deep Networks, F Pereira, C J C Burges, L Bottou,
and K Q Weinberger (Eds.). Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2012/file/
6aca97005c68f1206823815f66102863-Paper.pdf
[31] Timo M. Deist, Frank J.W.M. Dankers, Priyanka Ojha, M. Scott Marshall, Tomas Janssen, Corinne Faivre-Finn, Carlotta Masciocchi,
Vincenzo Valentini, Jiazhou Wang, Jiayan Chen, Zhen Zhang, Emiliano Spezi, Mick Button, Joost Jan Nuyttens, René Vernhout,
Johan van Soest, Arthur Jochems, René Monshouwer, Johan Bussink, Gareth Price, Philippe Lambin, and Andre Dekker. 2020.
Distributed learning on 20 000+ lung cancer patients – The Personal Health Train. Radiotherapy and Oncology 144 (3 2020). https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2019.11.019
[32] Qi Dou, Tiffany Y. So, Meirui Jiang, Quande Liu, Varut Vardhanabhuti, Georgios Kaissis, Zeju Li, Weixin Si, Heather H. C. Lee, Kevin
Yu, Zuxin Feng, Li Dong, Egon Burian, Friederike Jungmann, Rickmer Braren, Marcus Makowski, Bernhard Kainz, Daniel Rueckert,
Ben Glocker, Simon C. H. Yu, and Pheng Ann Heng. 2021. Federated deep learning for detecting COVID-19 lung abnormalities in CT: a
privacy-preserving multinational validation study. npj Digital Medicine 4 (12 2021). Issue 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00431-6
[33] Cynthia Dwork, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, Frank McSherry, Ilya Mironov, and Moni Naor. 2006. Our Data, Ourselves: Privacy Via
Distributed Noise Generation. (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/11761679_29
[34] Cynthia Dwork, Guy N. Rothblum, and Salil Vadhan. 2010. Boosting and Differential Privacy. 2010 IEEE 51st Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science. https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2010.12
[35] Fate. 2019. Federated AI Technology Enabler (FATE). https://github.com/FederatedAI/FATE (2019).
[36] Francisco Fernández-Avilés, Ricardo Sanz-Ruiz, Andreu M. Climent, Lina Badimón, R. Bolli, Dominique Charron, Valentin Fuster, Stefan
Janssens, Jens Kastrup, Hyo-Soo Kim, Thomas Felix Lüscher, John F. Martin, Philippe Menasché, Robert D. Simari, Gregg W. Stone,
Andre Terzic, James T. Willerson, Joseph C. Wu, Francisco Andre Fernández-Avilés Terzic, Lina Kathleen Darcy L. Stefanie Rosalinda
Marc S. Mark Badimon Broughton DiFede Dimmeler Madonna Penn Sus, Kathleen M. Broughton, Darcy L. DiFede, Stefanie Dimmeler,
Rosalinda Madonna, Marc S. Penn, Mark A Sussman, Joost P G Sluijter, Kai C. Wollert, Wayne Roberto Steven Dominique María
Eugenia Valentin Ge Balkan Bolli Chamuleau Charron Fernández-Santos Fu, Wayne Balkan, Steven A.J. Chamuleau, María Eugenia
Fernández-Santos, Georg Goliasch, Mariann Gyöngyösi, Joshua M. Hare, Bryon A Tompkins, Johannes Winkler, Antoni Timothy D.
Doris A. Bayés-Genís Henry Taylor, Antoni Bayés-Genís, Timothy D. Henry, Doris A Taylor, Andreu M. Amir Beatriz Felipe Climent
Lerman Pelacho Prosper, Amir Lerman, Beatriz Pelacho, Felipe Prosper, Ricardo Emerson C. Giulio Sanz-Ruiz Perin Pompilio, Emerson C.
Perin, Giulio Pompilio, Bernard Jozef Eric Péter Stefan Douglas W. Pedro L. Warren Gersh Bartunek Duckers Ferdinandy Janssens
Losordo, Bernard J. Gersh, Jozef Bartunek, Eric Duckers, Péter Ferdinandy, Douglas Losordo, Pedro L. Sánchez, Warren Sherman,
Wojtek Wojakowski, Andreas M. Zeiher, Jérôme Roncalli, Anthony Mathur, Filippo Domenico Thomas J. Jay Seppo Crea D´Amario
Povsic Traverse Ylä-Herttuala, Filippo Crea, Domenico D´Amario, Thomas J. Povsic, Jay H. Traverse, and Seppo Ylä-Herttuala. 2017.
Global position paper on cardiovascular regenerative medicine. European Heart Journal 38 (2017), 2532 – 2546.
[37] Mona Flores, I. Dayan, H. Roth, Aoxiao Zhong, A. Harouni, Amilcare Gentili, A. Abidin, Andrew Liu, A. Costa, B. Wood, Chien-Sung
Tsai, Chih-Hung Wang, C. Hsu, CK Lee, Colleen Ruan, Daguang Xu, Dufan Wu, E. Huang, F. Kitamura, G. Lacey, G. Corradi, Hao-Hsin
Shin, Hirofumi Obinata, Hui Ren, Jason Crane, Jesse Tetreault, Jiahui Guan, J. Garrett, J. Park, K. Dreyer, K. Juluru, Kristopher Kersten,
Marcio A. B. C. Rockenbach, M. Linguraru, M. Haider, M. Abdelmaseeh, Nicola Rieke, P. Damasceno, Pedro Silva, Pochuan Wang, Sheng
Xu, Shuichi Kawano, Sira Sriswa, S. Park, T. Grist, V. Buch, W. Jantarabenjakul, Weichung Wang, W. Tak, Xiang Li, Xihong Lin, Fred
Kwon, Fiona Gilbert, J. Kaggie, Quanzheng Li, Abood Quraini, Andrew Feng, A. Priest, B. Turkbey, B. Glicksberg, B. Bizzo, B. S. Kim,
Carlos Tor-Díez, Chia-Cheng Lee, Chia-Jung Hsu, Chin-Hsien Lin, C. Lai, Christopher Hess, Colin B. Compas, D. Bhatia, E. Oermann,
E. Leibovitz, H. Sasaki, Hitoshi Mori, Isaac Yang, J. H. Sohn, Krishna Nand Keshava Murthy, Lijuan Fu, Matheus Ribeiro Furtado de
Mendonça, Mike Fralick, M. Kang, M. Adil, Natalie Gangai, P. Vateekul, P. Elnajjar, Sara Hickman, S. Majumdar, S. McLeod, Sheridan
Reed, Stefan Graf, S. Harmon, T. Kodama, T. Puthanakit, T. Mazzulli, Vitor Lavor, Y. Rakvongthai, Yu Rim Lee, and Yuhong Wen. 2021.
Federated Learning used for predicting outcomes in SARS-COV-2 patients. Research Square (2021).
[38] Mona Flores, I Dayan, H Roth, Aoxiao Zhong, A Harouni, Amilcare Gentili, A Abidin, Andrew Liu, A Costa, B Wood, Chien-Sung
Tsai, Chih-Hung Wang, C Hsu, C K Lee, Colleen Ruan, Daguang Xu, Dufan Wu, E Huang, F Kitamura, G Lacey, G Corradi, Hao-Hsin
Shin, Hirofumi Obinata, Hui Ren, Jason Crane, Jesse Tetreault, Jiahui Guan, J Garrett, J Park, K Dreyer, K Juluru, Kristopher Kersten,
Marcio A B C Rockenbach, M Linguraru, M Haider, M Abdelmaseeh, Nicola Rieke, P Damasceno, Pedro Silva, Pochuan Wang, Sheng
Xu, Shuichi Kawano, Sira Sriswa, S Park, T Grist, V Buch, W Jantarabenjakul, Weichung Wang, W Tak, Xiang Li, Xihong Lin, Fred
Kwon, Fiona Gilbert, J Kaggie, Quanzheng Li, Abood Quraini, Andrew Feng, A Priest, B Turkbey, B Glicksberg, B Bizzo, B S Kim,
Carlos Tor-Díez, Chia-Cheng Lee, Chia-Jung Hsu, Chin-Hsien Lin, C Lai, Christopher Hess, Colin B Compas, D Bhatia, E Oermann, E
Leibovitz, H Sasaki, Hitoshi Mori, Isaac Yang, J H Sohn, Krishna Nand Keshava Murthy, Lijuan Fu, Matheus Ribeiro Furtado de Mendon,
Mike Fralick, M Kang, M Adil, Natalie Gangai, P Vateekul, P Elnajjar, Sara Hickman, S Majumdar, S McLeod, Sheridan Reed, Stefan
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
34
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Graf, S Harmon, T Kodama, T Puthanakit, T Mazzulli, Vitor Lavor, Y Rakvongthai, Yu Rim Lee, and Yuhong Wen. 2021. Federated
Learning used for predicting outcomes in SARS-COV-2 patients. Research Square (2021).
[39] Jonas Geiping, Hartmut Bauermeister, Hannah Dröge, and Michael Moeller. 2020. Inverting Gradients – How easy is it to break privacy
in federated learning? arXiv:2003.14053 [cs.CV]
[40] B Gibaud, G Kassel, M Dojat, B Batrancourt, Franck Michel, A Gaignard, and J Montagnat. 2011. NeuroLOG: sharing neuroimaging
data using an ontology-based federated approach. AMIA ... Annual Symposium proceedings. AMIA Symposium 2011 (2011), 472–80.
[41] Eren Gultepe, Jeffrey P Green, Hien Nguyen, Jason Adams, Timothy Albertson, and Ilias Tagkopoulos. 2014. From vital signs to clinical
outcomes for patients with sepsis: a machine learning basis for a clinical decision support system. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association 21, 2 (2014), 315–325.
[42] Jiale Guo, Ziyao Liu, Kwok-Yan Lam, Jun Zhao, Yiqiang Chen, and Chaoping Xing. 2021. Secure Weighted Aggregation for Federated
Learning.
[43] Andrew Hard, Kanishka Rao, Rajiv Mathews, Swaroop Ramaswamy, Françoise Beaufays, Sean Augenstein, Hubert Eichner, Chloé
Kiddon, and Daniel Ramage. 2019. Federated Learning for Mobile Keyboard Prediction. (2019). arXiv:1811.03604 [cs.CL]
[44] Chaoyang He, Murali Annavaram, and Salman Avestimehr. 2020. FedNAS: Federated Deep Learning via Neural Architecture Search.
CoRR abs/2004.08546 (2020). arXiv:2004.08546 https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.08546
[45] Chaoyang He, Murali Annavaram, and Salman Avestimehr. 2020. Group Knowledge Transfer: Collaborative Training of Large CNNs
on the Edge. CoRR abs/2007.14513 (2020). arXiv:2007.14513 https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.14513
[46] Chaoyang He, Songze Li, Jinhyun So, Mi Zhang, Hongyi Wang, Xiaoyang Wang, Praneeth Vepakomma, Abhishek Singh, Hang Qiu, Li
Shen, Peilin Zhao, Yan Kang, Yang Liu, Ramesh Raskar, Qiang Yang, Murali Annavaram, and Salman Avestimehr. 2020. FedML: A
Research Library and Benchmark for Federated Machine Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13518 (2020).
[47] Chaoyang He, Conghui Tan, Hanlin Tang, Shuang Qiu, and Ji Liu. 2020. Central Server Free Federated Learning over Single-sided
Trust Social Networks. (2020). arXiv:1910.04956 [cs.LG]
[48] A Honkela, Mrinal Das, O Dikmen, and Samuel Kaski. 2017. Efficient differentially private learning improves drug sensitivity prediction.
Biology Direct 13 (2017).
[49] M. Shamim Hossain and Ghulam Muhammad. 2019. Emotion recognition using secure edge and cloud computing. Information Sciences
504 (12 2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.07.040
[50] Li Huang, Andrew L. Shea, Huining Qian, Aditya Masurkar, Hao Deng, and Dianbo Liu. 2019. Patient clustering improves efficiency
of federated machine learning to predict mortality and hospital stay time using distributed electronic medical records. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics 99 (11 2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103291
[51] Li Huang, Yifeng Yin, Zeng Fu, Shifa Zhang, Hao Deng, and Dianbo Liu. 2020. LoAdaBoost: Loss-based AdaBoost federated machine
learning with reduced computational complexity on IID and non-IID intensive care data. PLOS ONE 15 (4 2020). Issue 4. https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230706
[52] IBMFL. 2020. IBM Federated Learning. https://github.com/IBM/federated-learning-lib (2020).
[53] Rebecca S Jacobson, M Becich, R Bollag, G Chavan, Julia Corrigan, R Dhir, M Feldman, Carmelo Gaudioso, Elizabeth Legowski, N Maihle,
K Mitchell, Monica Murphy, Mayurapriyan Sakthivel, Eugene Tseytlin, and J Weaver. 2015. A Federated Network for Translational
Cancer Research Using Clinical Data and Biospecimens. Cancer research 75 24 (2015), 5194–201.
[54] Ji Chu Jiang, B. Kantarci, S. Oktug, and T. Soyata. 2020. Federated Learning in Smart City Sensing: Challenges and Opportunities.
Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 20 (2020).
[55] A. Jochems, T. Deist, I. El Naqa, M. Kessler, C. Mayo, J. Reeves, S. Jolly, M. Matuszak, R. Ten Haken, J. van Soest, C. Oberije, C. Faivre-Finn,
G. Price, D. D. De Ruysscher, P. Lambin, and A. Dekker. 2017. Developing and Validating a Survival Prediction Model for NSCLC
Patients Through Distributed Learning Across 3 Countries. International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics 99 (2017), 344 –
352.
[56] Arthur Jochems, Timo M. Deist, Johan van Soest, Michael Eble, Paul Bulens, Philippe Coucke, Wim Dries, Philippe Lambin, and Andre
Dekker. 2016. Distributed learning: Developing a predictive model based on data from multiple hospitals without data leaving the
hospital – A real life proof of concept. Radiotherapy and Oncology 121 (12 2016). Issue 3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2016.10.002
[57] Ce Ju, Dashan Gao, Ravikiran Mane, Ben Tan, Yang Liu, and Cuntai Guan. 2020. Federated Transfer Learning for EEG Signal
Classification. 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC) (Jul 2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/embc44109.2020.9175344
[58] Ce Ju, Ruihui Zhao, Jichao Sun, Xiguang Wei, Bo Zhao, Yang Liu, Hongshan Li, Tianjian Chen, Xinwei Zhang, Dashan Gao, Ben Tan,
Han Yu, Chuning He, and Yuan Jin. 2020. Privacy-Preserving Technology to Help Millions of People: Federated Prediction Model for
Stroke Prevention.
[59] Peter Kairouz, H. Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary
Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, Rafael G. L. D’Oliveira, Hubert Eichner, Salim El Rouayheb, David Evans, Josh Gardner,
Zachary Garrett, Adrià Gascón, Badih Ghazi, Phillip B. Gibbons, Marco Gruteser, Zaid Harchaoui, Chaoyang He, Lie He, Zhouyuan
Huo, Ben Hutchinson, Justin Hsu, Martin Jaggi, Tara Javidi, Gauri Joshi, Mikhail Khodak, Jakub Konečný, Aleksandra Korolova, Farinaz
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
35
Koushanfar, Sanmi Koyejo, Tancrède Lepoint, Yang Liu, Prateek Mittal, Mehryar Mohri, Richard Nock, Ayfer Özgür, Rasmus Pagh,
Mariana Raykova, Hang Qi, Daniel Ramage, Ramesh Raskar, Dawn Song, Weikang Song, Sebastian U. Stich, Ziteng Sun, Ananda Theertha
Suresh, Florian Tramèr, Praneeth Vepakomma, Jianyu Wang, Li Xiong, Zheng Xu, Qiang Yang, Felix X. Yu, Han Yu, and Sen Zhao. 2021.
Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning. arXiv:1912.04977 [cs.LG]
[60] Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary
Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, Rafael G L D’Oliveira, Hubert Eichner, Salim El Rouayheb, David Evans, Josh Gardner,
Zachary Garrett, Adrià Gascón, Badih Ghazi, Phillip B Gibbons, Marco Gruteser, Zaid Harchaoui, Chaoyang He, Lie He, Zhouyuan Huo,
Ben Hutchinson, Justin Hsu, Martin Jaggi, Tara Javidi, Gauri Joshi, Mikhail Khodak, Jakub Konečný, Aleksandra Korolova, Farinaz
Koushanfar, Sanmi Koyejo, Tancrède Lepoint, Yang Liu, Prateek Mittal, Mehryar Mohri, Richard Nock, Ayfer Özgür, Rasmus Pagh,
Mariana Raykova, Hang Qi, Daniel Ramage, Ramesh Raskar, Dawn Song, Weikang Song, Sebastian U Stich, Ziteng Sun, Ananda Theertha
Suresh, Florian Tramèr, Praneeth Vepakomma, Jianyu Wang, Li Xiong, Zheng Xu, Qiang Yang, Felix X Yu, Han Yu, and Sen Zhao. 2021.
Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning.
[61] Kensaku Kawamoto, Caitlin A Houlihan, E. Andrew Balas, and David F. Lobach. 2005. Improving clinical practice using clinical decision
support systems: a systematic review of trials to identify features critical to success. BMJ : British Medical Journal 330 (2005), 765.
[62] A Kho, J Cashy, K Jackson, A Pah, Satyender Goel, J Boehnke, J Humphries, S Kominers, B Hota, S Sims, B Malin, D French, T Walunas,
D Meltzer, E Kaleba, R C Jones, and W Galanter. 2015. Design and implementation of a privacy preserving electronic health record
linkage tool in Chicago. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA 22 5 (2015), 1072–80.
[63] Peeter Laud and Alisa Pankova. 2018. Privacy-preserving record linkage in large databases using secure multiparty computation. BMC
Medical Genomics 11 (10 2018). Issue S4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-018-0400-8
[64] Leaf. 2019. Benchmarking framework for studying in federated settings. https://leaf.cmu.edu/ (2019).
[65] G Lee and S Shin. 2020. Federated Learning on Clinical Benchmark Data: Performance Assessment. Journal of Medical Internet Research
22 (2020).
[66] Haeyun Lee, Young Jun Chai, Hyunjin Joo, Kyungsu Lee, Jae Youn Hwang, Seok-Mo Kim, Kwangsoon Kim, Inn-Chul Nam, June Young
Choi, Hyeong Won Yu, Myung-Chul Lee, Hiroo Masuoka, Akira Miyauchi, Kyu Eun Lee, Sungwan Kim, and Hyoun-Joong Kong. 2021.
Federated Learning for Thyroid Ultrasound Image Analysis to Protect Personal Information: Validation Study in a Real Health Care
Environment. JMIR Medical Informatics 9 (5 2021). Issue 5. https://doi.org/10.2196/25869
[67] Qinbin Li, Zhaomin Wu, Zeyi Wen, and Bingsheng He. 2021.
Privacy-Preserving Gradient Boosting Decision Trees.
(2021).
arXiv:1911.04209 [cs.LG]
[68] Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet S. Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. 2020. Federated Learning: Challenges, Methods, and Future
Directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 37 (2020), 50–60.
[69] Wen Li, Fucang Jia, and Qingmao Hu. 2015. Automatic Segmentation of Liver Tumor in CT Images with Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks. Journal of Computer and Communications 03 (2015). Issue 11. https://doi.org/10.4236/jcc.2015.311023
[70] Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletarì, Daguang Xu, Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wentao Zhu, Maximilian Baust, Yan Cheng, Sébastien Ourselin,
M Jorge Cardoso, and Andrew Feng. 2019. Privacy-preserving Federated Brain Tumour Segmentation.
[71] Xiaoxiao Li, Yufeng Gu, N Dvornek, L Staib, P Ventola, and J Duncan. 2020. Multi-site fMRI Analysis Using Privacy-preserving
Federated Learning and Domain Adaptation: ABIDE Results. Medical image analysis 65 (2020), 101765.
[72] Dianbo Liu, Timothy Miller, Raheel Sayeed, and Kenneth D. Mandl. 2018. FADL:Federated-Autonomous Deep Learning for Distributed
Electronic Health Record. arXiv:1811.11400 [cs.CY]
[73] Jessica Chia Liu, Jack Goetz, Srijan Sen, and Ambuj Tewari. 2021. Learning From Others Without Sacrificing Privacy: Simulation
Comparing Centralized and Federated Machine Learning on Mobile Health Data. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 9 (3 2021). Issue 3.
https://doi.org/10.2196/23728
[74] Yang Liu, Yingting Liu, Zhijie Liu, Yuxuan Liang, Chuishi Meng, Junbo Zhang, and Yu Zheng. 2020. Federated Forest. IEEE Transactions
on Big Data (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBDATA.2020.2992755
[75] Sin Kit Lo, Qinghua Lu, Liming Zhu, Hye young Paik, Xiwei Xu, and Chen Wang. 2021. Architectural Patterns for the Design of
Federated Learning Systems. arXiv:2101.02373 [cs.LG]
[76] Lingjuan Lyu, Han Yu, and Qiang Yang. 2020. Threats to Federated Learning: A Survey. arXiv:2003.02133 [cs.CR]
[77] H Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas. 2017. Communication-Efficient
Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data.
[78] Bjoern H. Menze, Andras Jakab, Stefan Bauer, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, Keyvan Farahani, Justin Kirby, Yuliya Burren, Nicole Porz,
Johannes Slotboom, Roland Wiest, Levente Lanczi, Elizabeth Gerstner, Marc-Andre Weber, Tal Arbel, Brian B. Avants, Nicholas Ayache,
Patricia Buendia, D. Louis Collins, Nicolas Cordier, Jason J. Corso, Antonio Criminisi, Tilak Das, Herve Delingette, Cagatay Demiralp,
Christopher R. Durst, Michel Dojat, Senan Doyle, Joana Festa, Florence Forbes, Ezequiel Geremia, Ben Glocker, Polina Golland, Xiaotao
Guo, Andac Hamamci, Khan M. Iftekharuddin, Raj Jena, Nigel M. John, Ender Konukoglu, Danial Lashkari, Jose Antonio Mariz, Raphael
Meier, Sergio Pereira, Doina Precup, Stephen J. Price, Tammy Riklin Raviv, Syed M. S. Reza, Michael Ryan, Duygu Sarikaya, Lawrence
Schwartz, Hoo-Chang Shin, Jamie Shotton, Carlos A. Silva, Nuno Sousa, Nagesh K. Subbanna, Gabor Szekely, Thomas J. Taylor, Owen M.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
36
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
Thomas, Nicholas J. Tustison, Gozde Unal, Flor Vasseur, Max Wintermark, Dong Hye Ye, Liang Zhao, Binsheng Zhao, Darko Zikic,
Marcel Prastawa, Mauricio Reyes, and Koen Van Leemput. 2015. The Multimodal Brain Tumor Image Segmentation Benchmark
(BRATS). IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 34 (10 2015). Issue 10. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2014.2377694
[79] A Miyaji, Kazuhisa Nakasho, and Shohei Nishida. 2016. Privacy-Preserving Integration of Medical Data. Journal of Medical Systems 41
(2016).
[80] Atsuko Miyaji, Kazuhisa Nakasho, and Shohei Nishida. 2017. Privacy-Preserving Integration of Medical Data. Journal of Medical
Systems 41 (3 2017). Issue 3. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-016-0657-4
[81] Lorenzo Mucchi, Sara Jayousi, Stefano Caputo, Elisabetta Paoletti, Paolo Zoppi, Simona Geli, and Pietro Dioniso. 2020. How 6G
Technology Can Change the Future Wireless Healthcare. 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT) (2020), 1–6.
[82] Dinh C Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Pubudu N Pathirana, Ming Ding, Aruna Prasad Seneviratne, Zihuai Lin, Octavia A Dobre, and
Won Joo Hwang. 2021. Federated Learning for Smart Healthcare: A Survey. ArXiv abs/2111.08834 (2021).
[83] PaddleFL. 2019. PaddleFL. https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleFL/ (2019).
[84] Ankit Pal and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. 2021. Pay attention to the cough. Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing. https://doi.org/10.1145/3412841.3441943
[85] Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. 2022. MedMCQA: A Large-scale Multi-Subject Multi-Choice
Dataset for Medical domain Question Answering. In Proceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning (Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, Vol. 174), Gerardo Flores, George H Chen, Tom Pollard, Joyce C Ho, and Tristan Naumann (Eds.). PMLR,
248–260. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v174/pal22a.html
[86] Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Arunesh Sinha, and Michael Wellman. 2016. Towards the Science of Security and Privacy in
Machine Learning. arXiv:1611.03814 [cs.CR]
[87] Marco V. Perez, Kenneth W. Mahaffey, Haley Hedlin, John S. Rumsfeld, Ariadna Garcia, Todd Ferris, Vidhya Balasubramanian, Andrea M.
Russo, Amol Rajmane, Lauren Cheung, Grace Hung, Justin Lee, Peter Kowey, Nisha Talati, Divya Nag, Santosh E. Gummidipundi,
Alexis Beatty, Mellanie True Hills, Sumbul Desai, Christopher B. Granger, Manisha Desai, and Mintu P. Turakhia. 2019. Large-
Scale Assessment of a Smartwatch to Identify Atrial Fibrillation. New England Journal of Medicine 381 (11 2019). Issue 20. https:
//doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1901183
[88] Emerson C. Perin, James T. Willerson, Carl J. Pepine, Timothy D. Henry, Stephen G. Ellis, David X M Zhao, Guilherme V. Silva, Dejian
Lai, James D. Thomas, Marvin W. Kronenberg, A. Daniel Martin, R. David Anderson, Jay H. Traverse, Marc S. Penn, Saif Anwaruddin,
Antonis K. Hatzopoulos, Adrian P. Gee, Doris A Taylor, Christopher R. Cogle, Deirdre Smith, Lynette Westbrook, James Chen, Eileen M.
Handberg, Rachel E. Olson, Carrie Geither, Sherry Bowman, Judy Francescon, Sarah Baraniuk, Linda B. Piller, Lara M. Simpson,
Catalin Loghin, David Aguilar, Sara Richman, Claudia Zierold, Judy Bettencourt, Shelly L. Sayre, Rachel W. Vojvodic, Sonia I. Skarlatos,
David J. Gordon, Ray Francis Ebert, Minjung Kwak, Lemuel A. Moyé, and Robert D. Simari. 2012. Effect of transendocardial delivery of
autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells on functional capacity, left ventricular function, and perfusion in chronic heart failure: the
FOCUS-CCTRN trial. JAMA 307 16 (2012), 1717–26.
[89] Bjarne Pfitzner, Nico Steckhan, and Bert Arnrich. 2021. Federated Learning in a Medical Context: A Systematic Literature Review.
ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 21 (6 2021). Issue 2. https://doi.org/10.1145/3412357
[90] Tom Pollard, Irene Chen, Jenna Wiens, Steven Horng, Danny Wong, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Heather Mattie, Emily Lindmeer, and Trishan
Panch. 2019. Turning the crank for machine learning: ease, at what expense? The Lancet Digital Health 1 (09 2019), e198–e199.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(19)30112-8
[91] Adnan Qayyum, Kashif Ahmad, Muhammad Ahtazaz Ahsan, Ala Al-Fuqaha, and Junaid Qadir. 2021. Collaborative Federated Learning
For Healthcare: Multi-Modal COVID-19 Diagnosis at the Edge. ArXiv abs/2101.07511 (2021).
[92] Adnan Qayyum, Junaid Qadir, Muhammad Bilal, and Ala Al-Fuqaha. 2020. Secure and Robust Machine Learning for Healthcare: A
Survey. arXiv:2001.08103 [cs.LG]
[93] Deepta Rajan, David Beymer, Shafiqul Abedin, and Ehsan Dehghan. 2019. Pi-PE: A Pipeline for Pulmonary Embolism Detection using
Sparsely Annotated 3D CT Images.
[94] Suraj Rajendran, J Obeid, H Binol, Ralph D Agostino, K Foley, Wei Zhang, P Austin, Joey Brakefield, M Gurcan, and U Topaloglu. 2021.
Cloud-Based Federated Learning Implementation Across Medical Centers. JCO clinical cancer informatics 5 (2021), 1–11.
[95] Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletarì, Holger R. Roth, Shadi Albarqouni, Spyridon Bakas, Mathieu N. Galtier,
Bennett A. Landman, Klaus Maier-Hein, Sébastien Ourselin, Micah Sheller, Ronald M. Summers, Andrew Trask, Daguang Xu, Maximilian
Baust, and M. Jorge Cardoso. 2020. The future of digital health with federated learning. npj Digital Medicine 3 (12 2020). Issue 1.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-00323-1
[96] Holger R. Roth, Ken Chang, Praveer Singh, Nir Neumark, Wenqi Li, Vikash Gupta, Sharut Gupta, Liangqiong Qu, Alvin Ihsani, Bernardo C.
Bizzo, Yuhong Wen, Varun Buch, Meesam Shah, Felipe Kitamura, Matheus Mendonça, Vitor Lavor, Ahmed Harouni, Colin Compas, Jesse
Tetreault, Prerna Dogra, Yan Cheng, Selnur Erdal, Richard White, Behrooz Hashemian, Thomas Schultz, Miao Zhang, Adam McCarthy,
B. Min Yun, Elshaimaa Sharaf, Katharina V. Hoebel, Jay B. Patel, Bryan Chen, Sean Ko, Evan Leibovitz, Etta D. Pisano, Laura Coombs,
Daguang Xu, Keith J. Dreyer, Ittai Dayan, Ram C. Naidu, Mona Flores, Daniel Rubin, and Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer. 2020. Federated
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
Federated Learning for Healthcare Domain - Pipeline, Applications and Challenges
•
37
Learning for Breast Density Classification: A Real-World Implementation. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60548-3_18
[97] Theo Ryffel, Andrew Trask, Morten Dahl, Bobby Wagner, Jason Mancuso, Daniel Rueckert, and Jonathan Passerat-Palmbach. 2018. A
generic framework for privacy preserving deep learning. arXiv:1811.04017 [cs.LG]
[98] Mustafa Abdul Salam, Sanaa Taha, and Mohamed Ramadan. 2021. COVID-19 detection using federated machine learning. PLOS ONE
16 (6 2021). Issue 6. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0252573
[99] Karthik V Sarma, Stephanie Harmon, Thomas Sanford, Holger R Roth, Ziyue Xu, Jesse Tetreault, Daguang Xu, Mona G Flores, Alex G
Raman, Rushikesh Kulkarni, Bradford J Wood, Peter L Choyke, Alan M Priester, Leonard S Marks, Steven S Raman, Dieter Enzmann,
Baris Turkbey, William Speier, and Corey W Arnold. 2021. Federated learning improves site performance in multicenter deep learning
without data sharing. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 28 (6 2021). Issue 6. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocaa341
[100] Jonas Scherer, Marco Nolden, Jens Kleesiek, Jasmin Metzger, Klaus Kades, Verena Schneider, Michael Bach, Oliver Sedlaczek, Andreas M.
Bucher, Thomas J. Vogl, Frank Grünwald, Jens-Peter Kühn, Ralf-Thorsten Hoffmann, Jörg Kotzerke, Oliver Bethge, Lars Schimmöller,
Gerald Antoch, Hans-Wilhelm Müller, Andreas Daul, Konstantin Nikolaou, Christian la Fougère, Wolfgang G. Kunz, Michael Ingrisch,
Balthasar Schachtner, Jens Ricke, Peter Bartenstein, Felix Nensa, Alexander Radbruch, Lale Umutlu, Michael Forsting, Robert Seifert,
Ken Herrmann, Philipp Mayer, Hans-Ulrich Kauczor, Tobias Penzkofer, Bernd Hamm, Winfried Brenner, Roman Kloeckner, Christoph
Düber, Mathias Schreckenberger, Rickmer Braren, Georgios Kaissis, Marcus Makowski, Matthias Eiber, Andrei Gafita, Rupert Trager,
Wolfgang A. Weber, Jakob Neubauer, Marco Reisert, Michael Bock, Fabian Bamberg, Jürgen Hennig, Philipp Tobias Meyer, Juri
Ruf, Uwe Haberkorn, Stefan O. Schoenberg, Tristan Kuder, Peter Neher, Ralf Floca, Heinz-Peter Schlemmer, and Klaus Maier-Hein.
2020. Joint Imaging Platform for Federated Clinical Data Analytics. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics (11 2020). Issue 4. https:
//doi.org/10.1200/CCI.20.00045
[101] Rulin Shao, Hongyu He, Ziwei Chen, Hui Liu, and Dianbo Liu. 2020. Stochastic Channel-Based Federated Learning With Neural
Network Pruning for Medical Data Privacy Preservation: Model Development and Experimental Validation. JMIR Formative Research 4
(12 2020). Issue 12. https://doi.org/10.2196/17265
[102] Micah J. Sheller, Brandon Edwards, G. Anthony Reina, Jason Martin, Sarthak Pati, Aikaterini Kotrotsou, Mikhail Milchenko, Weilin Xu,
Daniel Marcus, Rivka R. Colen, and Spyridon Bakas. 2020. Federated learning in medicine: facilitating multi-institutional collaborations
without sharing patient data. Scientific Reports 10 (12 2020). Issue 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-69250-1
[103] Yuanming Shi, Kai Yang, Tao Jiang, Jun Zhang, and Khaled B. Letaief. 2020. Communication-Efficient Edge AI: Algorithms and Systems.
arXiv:2002.09668 [cs.IT]
[104] Santiago Silva, Boris Gutman, Eduardo Romero, Paul M Thompson, Andre Altmann, and Marco Lorenzi. 2019. Federated Learning in
Distributed Medical Databases: Meta-Analysis of Large-Scale Subcortical Brain Data.
[105] Johan Soest, Chang Sun, Ole Mussmann, Marco Puts, Bob Berg, Alexander Malic, Claudia Oppen, David Towend, André Dekker, and
Michel Dumontier. 2018. Using the Personal Health Train for Automated and Privacy-Preserving Analytics on Vertically Partitioned
Data. Studies in health technology and informatics 247 (7 2018), 581–585.
[106] Peter D Sottile, David Albers, Peter E DeWitt, Seth Russell, J N Stroh, David P Kao, Bonnie Adrian, Matthew E Levine, Ryan Mooney,
Lenny Larchick, Jean S Kutner, Matthew K Wynia, Jeffrey J Glasheen, and Tellen D Bennett. 2021. Real-time electronic health record
mortality prediction during the COVID-19 pandemic: a prospective cohort study. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
28 (10 2021). Issue 11. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocab100
[107] Reed Taylor Sutton, David Pincock, Daniel C. Baumgart, Daniel C. Sadowski, Richard N Fedorak, and Karen I Kroeker. 2020. An
overview of clinical decision support systems: benefits, risks, and strategies for success. NPJ Digital Medicine 3 (2020).
[108] Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow, and Rob Fergus. 2014. Intriguing
properties of neural networks. arXiv:1312.6199 [cs.CV]
[109] TFL. 2019. Tensorflow Federated Learning. https://www.tensorflow.org/federated/federated learning/ (2019).
[110] Chu Myaet Thwal, Kyi Thar, Ye Lin Tun, and Choong Seon Hong. 2021. Attention on Personalized Clinical Decision Support System:
Federated Learning Approach. 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing (BigComp) (2021), 141–147.
[111] Akhil Vaid, Suraj K Jaladanki, Jie Xu, Shelly Teng, Arvind Kumar, Samuel Lee, Sulaiman Somani, Ishan Paranjpe, Jessica K De
Freitas, Tingyi Wanyan, Kipp W Johnson, Mesude Bicak, Eyal Klang, Young Joon Kwon, Anthony Costa, Shan Zhao, Riccardo Miotto,
Alexander W Charney, Erwin Böttinger, Zahi A Fayad, Girish N Nadkarni, Fei Wang, and Benjamin S Glicksberg. 2021. Federated
Learning of Electronic Health Records to Improve Mortality Prediction in Hospitalized Patients With COVID-19: Machine Learning
Approach. JMIR Medical Informatics 9 (1 2021). Issue 1. https://doi.org/10.2196/24207
[112] Gilmer Valdes, Charles B Simone II, Josephine Chen, Alexander Lin, Sue S Yom, Adam J Pattison, Colin M Carpenter, and Timothy D
Solberg. 2017. Clinical decision support of radiotherapy treatment planning: A data-driven machine learning strategy for patient-specific
dosimetric decision making. Radiotherapy and Oncology 125, 3 (2017), 392–397.
[113] Praneeth Vepakomma, Tristan Swedish, Ramesh Raskar, Otkrist Gupta, and Abhimanyu Dubey. 2018. No Peek: A Survey of private
distributed deep learning.
[114] Fei Wang and Anita Preininger. 2019. AI in Health: State of the Art, Challenges, and Future Directions. , 016-026 pages.
https:
//doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1677908
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
38
•
Madhura Joshi, Ankit Pal, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu
[115] Hongyi Wang, Mikhail Yurochkin, Yuekai Sun, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Yasaman Khazaeni. 2020. Federated Learning with Matched
Averaging.
[116] Kangkang Wang, Rajiv Mathews, Chloé Kiddon, Hubert Eichner, Françoise Beaufays, and Daniel Ramage. 2019. Federated Evaluation
of On-device Personalization. (2019). arXiv:1910.10252 [cs.LG]
[117] Qiong Wu, Xu Chen, Zhi Zhou, and Junshan Zhang. 2020. FedHome: Cloud-Edge based Personalized Federated Learning for In-Home
Health Monitoring. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2020.3045266
[118] Xing Wu, Zhaowang Liang, and Jianjia Wang. 2020. FedMed: A Federated Learning Framework for Language Modeling. Sensors (Basel,
Switzerland) 20 (2020).
[119] X Wu, Hao Zheng, Zuochao Dou, F Chen, Jieren Deng, Xiang Chen, Shengqian Xu, Guanmin Gao, M Li, Z Wang, Yuhui Xiao, Kang Xie,
Shuang Wang, and Huji Xu. 2021. A novel privacy-preserving federated genome-wide association study framework and its application
in identifying potential risk variants in ankylosing spondylitis. Briefings in bioinformatics (2021).
[120] Zhaoping Xiong, Ziqiang Cheng, Chi Xu, Xinyuan Lin, Xiaohong Liu, Dingyan Wang, Xiaomin Luo, Y. Zhang, Nan Qiao, M. Zheng,
and Hualiang Jiang. 2020. Facing small and biased data dilemma in drug discovery with federated learning. bioRxiv (2020).
[121] Jie Xu, Benjamin S. Glicksberg, Chang Su, Peter Walker, Jiang Bian, and Fei Wang. 2021. Federated Learning for Healthcare Informatics.
Journal of Healthcare Informatics Research 5 (3 2021). Issue 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41666-020-00082-4
[122] Runhua Xu, Nathalie Baracaldo, Yi Zhou, Ali Anwar, James Joshi, and Heiko Ludwig. 2021. FedV: Privacy-Preserving Federated
Learning over Vertically Partitioned Data. arXiv:2103.03918 [cs.LG]
[123] Runhua Xu, Nathalie Baracaldo, Yi Zhou, Ali Anwar, James Joshi, and Heiko Ludwig. 2021. FedV: Privacy-Preserving Federated
Learning over Vertically Partitioned Data.
[124] Zeyue Xue, Pan Zhou, Zichuan Xu, Xiumin Wang, Yulai Xie, Xiaofeng Ding, and Shiping Wen. 2021. A Resource-Constrained and
Privacy-Preserving Edge-Computing-Enabled Clinical Decision System: A Federated Reinforcement Learning Approach. IEEE Internet
of Things Journal 8 (6 2021). Issue 11. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3057653
[125] Zengqiang Yan, Jeffry Wicaksana, Zhiwei Wang, Xin Yang, and Kwang-Ting Cheng. 2021. Variation-Aware Federated Learning
With Multi-Source Decentralized Medical Image Data. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 25 (7 2021). Issue 7.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2020.3040015
[126] Dong Yang, Ziyue Xu, Wenqi Li, Andriy Myronenko, Holger R. Roth, Stephanie Harmon, Sheng Xu, Baris Turkbey, Evrim Turkbey,
Xiaosong Wang, Wentao Zhu, Gianpaolo Carrafiello, Francesca Patella, Maurizio Cariati, Hirofumi Obinata, Hitoshi Mori, Kaku Tamura,
Peng An, Bradford J. Wood, and Daguang Xu. 2021. Federated semi-supervised learning for COVID region segmentation in chest CT
using multi-national data from China, Italy, Japan. Medical Image Analysis 70 (5 2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2021.101992
[127] Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin Tong. 2019. Federated Machine Learning: Concept and Applications. ACM Trans.
Intell. Syst. Technol. 10, 2, Article 12 (Jan. 2019), 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3298981
[128] Shengwen Yang, Bing Ren, Xuhui Zhou, and Liping Liu. 2019. Parallel Distributed Logistic Regression for Vertical Federated Learning
without Third-Party Coordinator.
[129] Timothy Yang, Galen Andrew, Hubert Eichner, Haicheng Sun, Wei Li, Nicholas Kong, Daniel Ramage, and Françoise Beaufays. 2018.
Applied Federated Learning: Improving Google Keyboard Query Suggestions.
[130] K. Y. Yigzaw, A. Budrionis, Luis Marco-Ruiz, Torje Dahle Henriksen, P. Halvorsen, and J. Bellika. 2020. Privacy-preserving architecture
for providing feedback to clinicians on their clinical performance. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 20 (2020).
[131] Kassaye Yitbarek Yigzaw, Antonis Michalas, and Johan Gustav Bellika. 2017. Secure and scalable deduplication of horizontally
partitioned health data for privacy-preserving distributed statistical computation. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 17 (12
2017). Issue 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-016-0389-x
[132] Tao Yu, Eugene Bagdasaryan, and Vitaly Shmatikov. 2020.
Salvaging Federated Learning by Local Adaptation.
(2020).
arXiv:2002.04758 [cs.LG]
[133] Lingchen Zhao, Lihao Ni, Shengshan Hu, Yaniiao Chen, Pan Zhou, Fu Xiao, and Libing Wu. 2018. InPrivate Digging: Enabling
Tree-based Distributed Data Mining with Differential Privacy. IEEE INFOCOM 2018 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications.
https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM.2018.8486352
[134] Zibin Zheng, Shaoan Xie, Hong Ning Dai, Xiangping Chen, and Huaimin Wang. 2018. Blockchain challenges and opportunities: a
survey. International Journal of Web and Grid Services 14 (2018). Issue 4. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJWGS.2018.095647
[135] Hangyu Zhu, Haoyu Zhang, and Yaochu Jin. 2020. From Federated Learning to Federated Neural Architecture Search: A Survey. (2020).
arXiv:2009.05868 [cs.DC]
[136] Hangyu Zhu, Haoyu Zhang, and Yaochu Jin. 2021. From federated learning to federated neural architecture search: a survey. Complex
& Intelligent Systems 7 (4 2021). Issue 2. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-020-00247-z
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: November 2022.
