Document Understanding for Healthcare Referrals
Jimit Mistry
Infinx Healthcare
Austin, USA
jimit.mistry@infinx.com
Natalia M. Arzeno
Infinx Healthcare
Austin, USA
natalia@infinx.com
Abstract—Reliance on scanned documents and fax communi-
cation for healthcare referrals leads to high administrative costs
and errors that may affect patient care. In this work we propose a
hybrid model leveraging LayoutLMv3 along with domain-specific
rules to identify key patient, physician, and exam-related entities
in faxed referral documents. We explore some of the challenges
in applying a document understanding model to referrals, which
have formats varying by medical practice, and evaluate model
performance using MUC-5 metrics to obtain appropriate metrics
for the practical use case. Our analysis shows the addition of
domain-specific rules to the transformer model yields greatly
increased precision and F1 scores, suggesting a hybrid model
trained on a curated dataset can increase efficiency in referral
management.
Index Terms—multi-modal model, hybrid model, referral man-
agement, healthcare delivery efficiency, information extraction,
document AI
I. INTRODUCTION
Despite the abundant use of electronic health record (EHR)
systems, many of these systems do not communicate with each
other, resulting in a healthcare industry that remains heavily
reliant on fax messages [1]. When physicians require another
provider to perform additional evaluations or procedures, a
referral document is generated, and is often sent via fax or as a
scanned image pdf. The receiving provider needs to understand
if it pertains to an existing or new patient, who sent it, and
for what reason. Specialists and imaging centers may receive
hundreds of referrals a day. Faxes and scanned documents are
often manually processed and entered into the corresponding
patient’s medical record, creating high administrative costs and
potential errors that can affect patient care. The documents
sent are of varied types and qualities, from faxes corrupted
with visual artifacts to generated pdfs sent as scanned files
that are not parsable. In this work, we present a hybrid model
for the extraction of key patient, referring physician, and exam
information from referrals, and explore some of the challenges
associated with this task.
In information extraction from referrals, rules-based ap-
proaches face many limitations, since each healthcare practice
may have their own format for submitting referrals. Patient
and physician information may or may not have corresponding
Patient and Physician keywords near them, creating a point of
failure for systems that extract key-value pairs from the text
where entity classification is dependant on keys. Additionally,
information about the procedure or diagnosis may be in free
text form. However, referral documents often follow a general
structure with patient details concentrated in one section and
physician details concentrated in a different section of the
page. This presents the opportunity to use models that account
for both the structure of a document and the text within it.
In this paper, we leverage LayoutLMv3 [2], a multi-modal
transformer model that incorporates embeddings for both
image and text, along with domain-specific rules to extract
entities associated with the patient, referring physician, and
ordered exam from faxed or scanned referral documents. To
our knowledge, there are no peer-reviewed publications for
LayoutLM applications in healthcare, as a PubMed search for
LayoutLM did not retrieve any records.
II. RELATED WORK
In 2019, LayoutLM [3], the first model published con-
sidering document structure as well as the text within it,
successfully classified images, identified information in forms,
and extracted entities from receipts. Other multi-modal models
considering the image of the document as well as the text
with varying architectures and pre-training objectives have
followed, such as UDoc [4], StructuralLM [5], DocFormer [6],
and GraphDoc [7], some of which outperformed LayoutLM.
More recently, LayoutLMv3 was proposed [2] which offers
state-of-the-art general performance in document understand-
ing tasks due to its pre-training on unified text and image
masking along with a word-patch alignment objective to learn
crossmodal alignment. None of the datasets for these models
included healthcare documents.
III. METHODS
A. Data and Annotations
The dataset consists of varied types and quality of scans and
faxes of referrals or order documents submitted to radiology
imaging centers between August and December 2022. These
include faxes, scanned generated pdfs, forms with handwriting,
and scans of prints, with the document structure varying based
on the referring provider. Some of these documents cannot
be parsed through OCR tools, and are not considered in this
paper. Fig. 1 illustrates some referral structures. A referral
document typically consists of 1-3 pages. Model development
and analyses were performed per page.
The training set was annotated by internal team members
whose day-to-day tasks include receiving scanned documents,
identifying which patient they belong to in the imaging
center’s system, and correctly adding them to the patient’s
arXiv:2309.13184v1  [cs.CL]  22 Sep 2023
Fig. 1. Sample of document structures in referrals.
EHR. For the training data, the annotations were limited
to a maximum of one annotation of each entity type per
page. The test dataset was annotated by a separate internal
team following the same guidelines with the exception that
all occurrences of an entity type were annotated on a page.
Documents for the test set were obtained from the same pool
of scanned documents as the training set, ensuring these had
not yet been annotated.
The entity types for annotation and identification were:
1) Patient’s full name
2) Patient’s date of birth (DOB)
3) Patient’s gender
4) Patient’s address
5) Referring physician’s full name
6) Referring physician’s address
7) Ordered exam (procedure)
8) Reason for exam
The training data consisted of 3032 pages and the test data
consisted of 137 pages from 100 documents.
B. Annotation Quality
Fifty random samples from the train and test set were
audited by both authors. Only Patient and Physician related
entities were audited, as Exam-type entities can span multiple
sentences and were not annotated in a consistent manner. For
example, some documents have individual sentences annotated
whereas others have entire sections annotated as one Exam-
type entity. The average F1 score for the train and test sets
after data preprocessing (Section III-D) was 0.92 and 0.93
respectively. Note that for the train set audit, any one instance
of each entity type is considered as correct. Following this
analysis, we identified 24 pages from the test data that had 3 or
fewer annotations, which were removed after confirmation of
incorrect or missing annotations. The final test data consisted
of 112 pages.
C. OCR and Text Grouping
The images in the dataset were scans or faxes of documents,
requiring OCR in order to extract the text and bounding boxes
for input to LayoutLMv3. In this work, we use Amazon
Textract’s [8] text detection, which outputs text and bounding
boxes at the token and line level. Given the varied structure
in the referral documents, the text identified by OCR had to
be additionally processed to be able to correctly order words
in multi-line text. The grouping of lines is critical in order
to understand entities that can span lines of text. Though
we evaluated text grouping as identified by the baseline
LayoutParser model [9], the results were not satisfactory, likely
as the structures of its training documents differ too much from
the structure of referral documents.
We leverage DBSCAN [10], a density-based clustering
algorithm without a predetermined number of clusters, in our
custom grouping of lines. Note that we follow Textract’s
output of lines, which may have multiple lines for a single
vertical position on the page based on the page structure. The
grouping is a multi-step process:
1) Cluster lines using DBSCAN on the y-coordinate.
2) Within each cluster, pre-define a sparse distance matrix
to ensure lines are not skipped in a grouping, then run
DBSCAN on the x-coordinates.
3) Within each new cluster, span the horizontal length to
detect columns and split if columns are found.
Fig. 2 displays sample outputs of text grouping.
Fig. 2. Grouping of OCR lines in different document structures.
D. Data Preprocessing
Initial exploration of annotations revealed some noisy labels,
thus data label corrections were implemented to improve
data quality. Excess tokens in the annotations, mainly due
to the field names (e.g. Name:) were the most prevalent
issue. Domain-specific stop word removal was undertaken
for all entity types to remove the unwanted noise added by
annotator tool limitations or annotators. Address type entities
are notoriously difficult to correct because of their versatility.
The stop word removal applied on address entities removed
field names comprising Address, city, state, line, 1:, 2:, zip.
Additionally, phone numbers were removed from addresses
and spans of some entities were corrected by searching to the
left of the beginning token of the annotation, to correct single-
token name annotations and addresses with street numbers or
cardinal directions (N,S,E,W) missing. These and additional
preprocessing correcting provider credentials and physician
names incorrectly annotated as patient names (as identified
via credentials) corrected 5132 labels.
E. Model Training
We take a pre-trained Huggingface LayoutLMv3 model
[11] as a base model and train it on a token classification
downstream task. The model expects token text, the bounding
box related to the token text, and the image as the inputs. The
processor for LayoutLMv3 converts them to text embeddings,
1-D positional embeddings, image section embeddings, and 2-
D positional embeddings. For training, the labels have to be in
the named entity recognition (NER) format consisting of B-
(beginning) tokens and I- (intermediate) tokens that signify the
start and continuation of an entity respectively.
The model expects a single bounding box for an entire
segment of the document, with all tokens within that segment
mapped to that particular bounding box. This enables the
model to understand structure and context for predictions. To
obtain the segments and segment-level bounding boxes, we
relied on the grouping code. This has limitations, however,
since grouping may result in incorrect text splits at times
and hamper performance. Additionally, the entities we seek to
identify often share a segment-level bounding box with other
tokens and, at inference, we required the entity assignment to
be at the word level given the business use case. Thus, the
model had to consider word-level bounding boxes.
We explored three training strategies, which all used the
grouping code to determine word order. The first two strategies
passed only word-level bounding boxes and only segment-
level bounding boxes respectively. Both models were trained
for 20 epochs at a learning rate of 1-5. The third strategy
split the training dataset to have 40% data with segment-level
bounding boxes and 60% with word-level bounding boxes. The
model was trained first on segment-level, and then on word-
level bounding box data for 10 epochs each at 1e-5 learning
rate.
F. Inference: Prediction to Complete Entity
The inference function takes the model predictions for each
token and creates a complete entity by combining contiguous
B- and I- tokens of the same entity type. If a new B- token
is detected, it is considered the start of a separate entity in
itself. Given initial model exploration, we added the capability
to consider entities starting with an I- token. Training data
provided some additional challenges, as the model predicted
the entities with the same issues that plagued the training data.
Particularly, the disjointed entities with address labels needed
to be handled in the inference function. The function first
created all complete entities by combining the tokens based on
the logic stated above. Then, any address entity of the same
type was combined with the previously detected address entity
as long as there was a margin of ≤5 tokens between them. The
margin of 5 tokens was calculated by identifying the maximum
number of stop words between the disjointed entities (Address,
Line, City, State, and Zip, as in “Address line 1: 123 street
number, Address line 2: <empty>, City, State, Zip: CT, ST,
12345” where the bold words are the predicted tokens.
G. Hybrid Module: Rules Functions
We propose a hybrid approach that applies rules to the pre-
dictions obtained from inference. Domain and entity-specific
rules are applied to improve the performance of exact matches,
on the entities identified by the inference function, the same
logic used in preprocessing data correction functions.
H. Model Evaluation
The business case for entity extraction in referrals does not
conform to traditional analyses with false positives and false
negatives. For example, a patient name incorrectly identified
as physician name can be considered both a false positive
and a false negative for patient name, as an incorrect value
is detected and the true value remains missing. The MUC-
5 evaluation metrics [12] account for such cases and are
thus used for model evaluation. Each prediction (or missing
prediction) is assigned to one of five classes. The classes
require aligning tokens from the predictions and annotations
in order to determine the degree of overlap and correctness.
Let ˆt be tokens with predicted entity type ˆy, and t be the
aligned annotated tokens with entity type y. The classes are:
• Correct (COR): ˆy = y AND ˆt = t
• Partial (PAR): ˆy = y AND |ˆt ∩t| ≥0.5|t| AND ˆt ̸= t
• Incorrect (INC): ˆy ̸= y OR |ˆt ∩t| < 0.5|t|
• Missing (MIS): y has no aligned predicted entity
• Spurious (SPU): ˆy has no aligned annotated entity
Precision and recall for the MUC-5 metrics are based on
the possible and actual counts:
possible = COR + PAR + INC + MIS
actual = COR + PAR + INC + SPU
partial precision = COR + 0.5 × PAR
possible
partial recall = COR + 0.5 × PAR
actual
Note that the partial and incorrect predictions form part of
the denominator in both the precision and recall.
Following the business use case, where the goal is to extract
referral information regardless of its exact location on the
page, a single prediction for each entity type is selected per
page for the Patient and Physician entity types. The entity to
extract is selected via majority voting with ties broken by the
maximum token count in an entity. For Exam-type entities,
all unique values are considered valid. Each of these selected
entities is then compared against all instances of the true labels
for each entity type respectively. If the selected entity matches
any one instance of the same entity type from the true labels,
it is considered an exact match (COR). In a partial match
(PAR), the prediction should overlap with at least 50% of the
true label without an exact match. Partial precision and recall
only consider 50% of the partial matches in the numerator.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A comparison of the strategies presented in Section III-E,
considering differences in the bounding boxes passed to
LayoutLMv3 (word-level, segment-level, or segment+word-
level), revealed the worst performance when considering only
segment-level bounding boxes. The segment-level model out-
performed the word-level bounding box input model only in
TABLE I
MODEL EVALUATION): PATIENT RELATED ENTITIES
Model
Name
DOB
Gender
Address
Type
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
Base
0.70
0.64
0.67
0.92
0.76
0.83
0.32
0.15
0.21
0.53
0.52
0.53
Base+Corr
0.71
0.64
0.67
0.84
0.59
0.69
0.35
0.17
0.23
0.52
0.55
0.53
Base+Corr+Post
0.79
0.71
0.75
0.93
0.64
0.76
0.90
0.13
0.22
0.64
0.68
0.66
TABLE II
MODEL EVALUATION: PHYSICIAN RELATED ENTITIES
Model
Name
Address
Type
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
Base
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.45
0.48
0.46
Base+Corr
0.59
0.53
0.55
0.48
0.46
0.47
Base+Corr+Post
0.73
0.65
0.69
0.69
0.66
0.67
TABLE III
MODEL EVALUATION: EXAM RELATED ENTITIES
Model
Reason For Exam
Procedures
Type
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
Base
0.55
0.51
0.53
0.48
0.42
0.45
Base+Corr
0.53
0.49
0.51
0.49
0.45
0.47
Base+Corr+Post
0.55
0.51
0.53
0.52
0.48
0.50
large entities, namely Address-type and Exam-type entities,
but had the worst results of three approaches for the rest of the
entities (results not shown). The segment+word-level model
improved the performance in longer entities. It performed the
best in Address-type and Exam-type long entities, and better
than the segment-only model in the rest of the entities. The
results shown in this section are for the word-only model, due
to its best overall performance, including the best performance
in medium and smaller entities out of the three models.
For referral management, the patient name, physician name,
patient DOB, and patient gender act as important identifiers.
Experimental results are listed in Table I, Table II, and
Table III for the LayoutLMv3 model (Base), the model with
corrected labels following the preprocessing of Section III-D
(Base+Corr), and the model with both preprocessing of anno-
tations and postprocessing of predictions (Base+Corr+Post).
The evaluation metric, MUC-5, does not conform to the
traditional standard of a confusion matrix, where the denom-
inator of precision and recall produces decreased numbers
across the board compared to using the standard f1, precision,
and recall calculations. However, these metrics are required to
better understand the implications of deploying such a model
in a business production setting.
The hybrid model with postprocessing (Base+Corr+Post)
resulted in an increase in precision, recall, and F1 scores across
all entity types by an average of 38.5%, 10.06%, and 14.1%
respectively. This proves that our proposed hybrid approach
performs much better than using just the model predictions
when we have training data limitations.
For partial matches, most of the F1 scores are above 0.65,
with the major identifiers among the top scorers. Analysis of
the number of entities predicted per page revealed at most
one instance for an entity per page in a majority of cases,
likely since the training data has at most one instance of
an entity type labeled. However, the curated test dataset has
every occurrence of an entity type labeled. Even in the case
of identifying any one instance, the results show poor recall
compared to precision in all entities. We speculate the single
annotation per type per page in the training set generated
noise in the model whenever it tried to predict the same
entity in any other location other than the one labeled, and the
model results may improve with a comprehensively annotated
training dataset.
Poor performance in gender is likely due to the single token
entity often missing in the noisy training data and smaller loss
contribution from the single-token entity. Comparing Table
I and Table II, patient name entity results are better than
physician name entity results. The incorrect predictions are
due to referrals having multiple unique physician names listed
on a single page along with the true referring physician name.
Identifying exam procedure and reason for exam presented
additional challenges as the entities can be found in a variety
of forms, such as descriptive text and/or codes and annotation
analysis showed that no single convention was followed.
Precision was improved with the hybrid model, as the model
showed with better partial results that it is good at detecting
the location of the entities on a page. We expect completeness
and curation of the training dataset annotations will lead to
improvements in the recall and F1 scores.
V. CONCLUSION
Information extraction from healthcare referral documents
presents multiple challenges due to varied structures and con-
founding entities. We proposed a hybrid multi-modal model to
extract information related to the patient, referring physician,
and exam, and evaluated a model trained on incomplete
annotations. With MUC-5 F1 scores in the 0.66-0.76 range
for most patient and physician entities, we expect this hybrid
approach trained on complete and curated annotations can
positively impact the referral management process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude
to Yash Soni, Rajat Garg, Rahul Ranjan, and Ankur Goel
for the development of the annotation tool. The authors also
acknowledge Aakarsh Sethi for his insight in ensuring the
study’s practical relevance.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Brown, “Health care clings to faxes as U.S. pushes electronic
records,”
https://news.bloomberglaw.com/health-law-and-business/
health-care-clings-to-faxes-as-u-s-pushes-electronic-records,
Nov.
2021, accessed: 2023-1-29.
[2] Y. Huang, T. Lv, L. Cui, Y. Lu, and F. Wei, “LayoutLMv3: Pre-training
for document AI with unified text and image masking,” Apr. 2022.
[3] Y. Xu, M. Li, L. Cui, S. Huang, F. Wei, and M. Zhou, “LayoutLM: Pre-
training of text and layout for document image understanding,” Dec.
2019.
[4] J. Gu, J. Kuen, V. I. Morariu, H. Zhao, N. Barmpalios, R. Jain,
A. Nenkova, and T. Sun, “Unified pretraining framework for document
understanding,” Apr. 2022.
[5] C. Li, B. Bi, M. Yan, W. Wang, S. Huang, F. Huang, and L. Si,
“StructuralLM: Structural pre-training for form understanding,” May
2021.
[6] S. Appalaraju, B. Jasani, B. U. Kota, Y. Xie, and R. Manmatha,
“DocFormer: End-to-End transformer for document understanding,” Jun.
2021.
[7] Z. Zhang, J. Ma, J. Du, L. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Multimodal pre-training
based on graph attention network for document understanding,” IEEE
Trans. Multimedia, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[8] Amazon Web Services, “Amazon textract,” https://aws.amazon.com/
textract/, accessed: 2022-09-01.
[9] Z. Shen, R. Zhang, M. Dell, B. C. G. Lee, J. Carlson, and W. Li,
“LayoutParser: A unified toolkit for deep learning based document
image analysis,” Mar. 2021.
[10] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based al-
gorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,”
in Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining.
AAAI Press, Aug. 1996, pp. 226–231.
[11] “microsoft/layoutlmv3-large,”
https://huggingface.co/microsoft/
layoutlmv3-large, accessed 2023-01-22.
[12] N. Chinchor and B. Sundheim, “MUC-5 evaluation metrics,” in Fifth
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-5): Proceedings of a Con-
ference Held in Baltimore, Maryland, August 25-27, 1993, 1993.
