Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
Through Combining Model-Based Testing and
Machine Learning
(Full Version)⋆
Bernhard K. Aichernig, Roderick Bloem, Masoud Ebrahimi, Martin Horn,
Franz Pernkopf, Wolfgang Roth, Astrid Rupp, Martin Tappler, and
Markus Tranninger
Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
aichernig@ist.tugraz.at, roderick.bloem@iaik.tugraz.at,
masoud.ebrahimi@iaik.tugraz.at, martin.horn@tugraz.at, pernkopf@tugraz.at,
roth@tugraz.at, astrid.rupp@fprimezero.com, martin.tappler@ist.tugraz.at,
markus.tranninger@tugraz.at
Abstract. Models play an essential role in the design process of cyber-
physical systems. They form the basis for simulation and analysis and
help in identifying design problems as early as possible. However, the
construction of models that comprise physical and digital behavior is
challenging. Therefore, there is considerable interest in learning such
hybrid behavior by means of machine learning which requires suﬃcient
and representative training data covering the behavior of the physical
system adequately. In this work, we exploit a combination of automata
learning and model-based testing to generate suﬃcient training data fully
automatically.
Experimental results on a platooning scenario show that recurrent neural
networks learned with this data achieved signiﬁcantly better results com-
pared to models learned from randomly generated data. In particular,
the classiﬁcation error for crash detection is reduced by a factor of ﬁve
and a similar F1-score is obtained with up to three orders of magnitude
fewer training samples.
Keywords: Hybrid Systems · Behavior Modeling · Automata Learn-
ing · Model-Based Testing · Machine Learning · Autonomous Vehicle ·
Platooning
1
Introduction
In Cyber Physical Systems (CPSs), embedded computers and networks control
physical processes. Most often, CPSs interact with their surroundings based on
⋆This work is an extended preprint of the conference paper “Learning a Behavior
Model of Hybrid Systems Through Combining Model-Based Testing and Machine
Learning” accepted for presentation at IFIP-ICTSS 2019, the 31st International Con-
ference on Testing Software and Systems in Paris, France.
arXiv:1907.04708v1  [cs.LG]  10 Jul 2019
2
B. K. Aichernig et al.
the context and the (history of) external events through an analog interface.
We use the term hybrid system to refer to such reactive systems that intermix
discrete and continuous components [22]. Since hybrid systems are dominating
safety-critical areas, safety assurances are of utmost importance. However, we
know that most veriﬁcation problems for hybrid systems are undecidable [13].
Therefore, models and model-based simulation play an essential role in the
design process of such systems. They help in identifying design problems as early
as possible and facilitate integration testing with model-in-the-loop techniques.
However, the construction of hybrid models that comprise physical and digital
behavior is challenging. Modeling such systems with reasonable ﬁdelity requires
expertise in several areas, including control engineering, software engineering
and sensor networks [8].
Therefore, we see a growing interest in learning such cyber-physical behavior
with the help of machine learning. Examples include helicopter dynamics [28],
the physical layer of communication protocols [25], standard continuous control
problems [10], and industrial process control [34].
However, in general, machine learning requires a large and representative set
of training data. Moreover, for the simulation of safety-critical features, rare side-
conditions need to be suﬃciently covered. Given the large state-space of hybrid
systems, it is diﬃcult to gather a good training set that captures all critical
behavior. Neither nominal samples from operation nor randomly generated data
will be suﬃcient. Here, advanced test-case generation methods can help to derive
a well-designed training set with adequate coverage.
Hybrid
System
Finite State
Model
Test Cases
Hybrid
System
Behavioral
Dataset
Behavior
Model
Automata
Learning
Test-Case
Generation
Testing
Logging
Machine
Learning
Model-Based Test-Case
Generation
Behavior Model
Generation
Fig. 1: Learning a behavior model
of a black-box hybrid system.
In this paper, we combine automata
learning and Model-Based Testing (MBT)
to derive an adequate training set, and
then use machine learning to learn a be-
havior model from a black-box hybrid sys-
tem. We can use the learned behavior
model for multiple purposes such as mon-
itoring runtime behavior. Furthermore, it
could be used as a surrogate of a complex
and heavy-weight simulation model to eﬃ-
ciently analyze safety-critical behavior of-
ﬂine [32]. Figure 1 depicts the overall exe-
cution ﬂow of our proposed setting. Given
a black-box hybrid system, we learn au-
tomata as discrete abstractions of the sys-
tem. Next, we investigate the learned au-
tomata for critical behaviors. Once behaviors of interest are discovered, we use
MBT to drive the hybrid system towards these behaviors and determine its ob-
servable actions in a continuous domain. This process results in a behavioral
dataset with high coverage of the hybrid system’s behavior including rare con-
ditions. Finally, we train a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model that gener-
alizes the behavioral dataset. For evaluation, we compared four diﬀerent testing
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
3
Fig. 2: Platooning as distributed control scenario. Adapted from a ﬁgure in [9].
approaches, by generating datasets via testing, learning RNN models from the
data and computing various performance measures for detecting critical behav-
iors in unforeseen situations. Experimental results show that RNNs learned with
data generated via MBT achieved signiﬁcantly better performance compared to
models learned from randomly generated data. In particular, the classiﬁcation
error is reduced by a factor of ﬁve and a similar F1-score is accomplished with
up to three orders of magnitude fewer training samples.
Motivating Example. Throughout the paper we illustrate our approach uti-
lizing a platooning scenario, implemented in a testbed in the Automated Driv-
ing Lab at Graz University of Technology (see also https://www.tugraz.at/
institute/irt/research/automated-driving-lab/). Platooning of vehicles
is a complex distributed control scenario, see Fig. 2. Local control algorithms of
each participant are responsible for reliable velocity and distance control. The
vehicles continuously sense their environments, e.g. the distance to the vehicle
ahead and may use discrete, i.e. event triggered, communication to communicate
desired accelerations along the platoon [9]. Besides individual vehicle stability,
the most crucial goal in controller design is to guarantee so-called string stability
of the platoon [27]. This stability concept basically demands that errors in posi-
tion or velocity do not propagate along the vehicle string which otherwise might
cause accidents or traﬃc jams upstream. Controllers for diﬀerent platooning sce-
narios and spacing policies are available, e. g., constant time headway spacing
[27] or constant distance spacing with or without communication [30].
Available controller designs are legitimated by rigorous mathematical sta-
bility proofs as an important theoretical foundation. In real applications it is
often hard to fulﬁll every single modeling assumption of the underlying proofs,
e. g., perfect sensing or communication. However, these additional uncertainties
can often be captured in ﬁne-grained simulation models. This motivates MBT
of vehicle platooning control algorithms by the approach presented in this pa-
per. Also, the learned behavior model can be used to detect undesired behavior
during run-time. In [9], a hybrid system formulation of a platooning scenario
is presented based on control theoretic considerations. In this contribution we
aim to determine targeted behavior of such models with as few assumptions as
possible by combining MBT and machine learning. As a ﬁrst step, we consider
two vehicles of the platoon, the leader and its ﬁrst follower, in this paper, but
the general approach can be extended to more vehicles.
This work is an extended preprint of the conference paper “Learning a Be-
havior Model of Hybrid Systems Through Combining Model-Based Testing and
4
B. K. Aichernig et al.
Machine Learning” accepted for presentation at IFIP-ICTSS 2019, the 31st In-
ternational Conference on Testing Software and Systems in Paris, France.
Outline. This paper has the following structure. Section 2 summarizes automata
learning and MBT. Section 3 explains how to learn an automaton from a black-
box hybrid system, then use it to target interesting behavior of the hybrid system
such that we create a behavioral dataset that can be used for machine learning
purposes. Section 4 discusses the results gained by applying our approach to a
real-world platooning scenario. Section 5 covers related work. Section 6 concludes
and discusses future research directions.
2
Preliminaries
Deﬁnition 1 (Mealy Machine). A Mealy machine is a tuple ⟨I, O, Q, q0, δ, λ⟩
where Q is a nonempty set of states, q0 is the initial state, δ : Q × I →Q is a
state-transition function and λ : Q × I →O is an output function.
We write q
i/o
−−→q′ if q′ = δ(q, i) and o = λ(q, i). We extend δ as usual to δ∗for
input sequences πi, i. e., δ∗(q, πi) is the state reached after executing πi in q.
Deﬁnition 2 (Observation). An observation π over input/output alphabet
I and O is a pair ⟨πi, πo⟩∈I∗× O∗s.t. |πi| = |πo|. Given a Mealy ma-
chine M, the set of observations of M from state q denoted by obsM(q) are
obsM(q) =

⟨πi, πo⟩∈I∗× O∗
 ∃q′ : q
πi/πo
−−−−→∗q′

, where
πi/πo
−−−−→∗is the tran-
sitive and reﬂexive closure of the combined transition-and-output function to
sequences which implies |πi| = |πo|. From this point forward, obsM = obsM(q0).
Two Mealy machines M1 and M2 are observation equivalent, denoted M1 ≈
M2, if obsM1 = obsM2.
2.1
Active Automata Learning
In her semimal paper, Angluin [4] presented L∗, an algorithm for learning a
deterministic ﬁnite automaton (DFA) accepting an unknown regular language
L from a minimally adequate teacher (MAT). Many other active learning algo-
rithms also use the MAT model [15]. An MAT generally needs to be able to an-
swer two types of queries: membership and equivalence queries. In DFA learning,
the learner asks membership queries, checking inclusion of words in the language
L. Once gained enough information, the learner builds a hypothesis automaton
H and asks an equivalence query, checking whether H accepts exactly L. The
MAT either responds with yes, meaning that learning was successful. Otherwise
it responds with a counterexample to equivalence, i. e., a word in the symmet-
ric diﬀerence between L and the language accepted by H. If provided with a
counterexample, the learner integrates it into its knowledge and starts a new
round of learning by issuing membership queries, which is again concluded by
a new equivalence query. L∗is adapted to learn Mealy machines by Shahbaz
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
5
and Groz [31]. The basic principle remains the same, but output queries replace
membership queries asking for outputs produced in response to input sequences.
The goal in this adapted L∗algorithm, is to learn a Mealy machine that is
observation equivalent to a black-box system under learning (SUL).
Abstraction. L∗is only aﬀordable for small alphabets; hence, Aarts et al. [1] sug-
gested to abstract away the concrete domain of the data, by forming equivalence
classes in the alphabets. This is usually done by a mapper placed in between the
learner and the SUL; see Fig. 3. Practically, mappers are state-full components
transducing symbols back and forth between abstract and concrete alphabets
using constraints deﬁned over diﬀerent ranges of concrete values. Since the in-
put and output space of control systems is generally large or of unbounded size,
we also apply abstraction by using a mapper.
The mapper communicates with the SUL via the concrete alphabet and with
the learner via the abstract alphabet. In the setting shown in Fig. 3, the learner
behaves like the L∗algorithm by Shahbaz and Groz [31], but the teacher answers
to the queries by interacting with the SUL through the mapper.
Teacher
MBT
Mapper
SUL
Learner
Output
Queries
Equivalence
Queries
Test
Queries
Fig. 3: Abstract automata learning
through a mapper [36].
Learning and Model-Based Testing. Teach-
ers are usually implemented via testing to
learn models of black-box systems, The
teacher in Fig. 3 wraps the SUL, uses
a mapper for abstraction and includes a
Model-Based Testing (MBT) component.
Output queries typically reset the SUL, ex-
ecute a sequence of inputs and collect the
produced outputs, i. e., they perform a sin-
gle test of the SUL. Equivalence queries are
often approximated via MBT [2]. For that,
an MBT component derives test cases (test queries) from the hypothesis model,
which are executed to ﬁnd discrepancies between the SUL and the learned hy-
pothesis, i. e., to ﬁnd counterexamples to equivalence.
Various MBT techniques have been applied in active automata learning, like
the W-Method [7, 37], or the partial W-Method [12], which are also im-
plemented in LearnLib [17]. These techniques attempt to prove conformance
relative to some bound on the SUL states. However, these approaches require a
large number of tests. Given the limited testing time available in practice, it is
usually necessary to aim at “ﬁnding counterexamples fast” [16]. Therefore, ran-
domized testing has recently shown to be successful in the context of automata
learning, such as a randomized conformance testing technique [33] and fault-
coverage-based testing [3]. We apply a variation of the latter, which combines
transition coverage as test selection criterion with randomization.
While active automata learning relies on MBT to implement equivalence
queries, it also enables MBT, by learning models that serve as basis for test-
ing [2,15]. Automata learning can be seen as collecting and incrementally reﬁn-
ing information about a SUL through testing. This process is often combined
6
B. K. Aichernig et al.
Test-Case
Generator
Tester
Mapper
Test
Driver
ADC
DAC
Hybrid
System
Test
Sequences
Test
Observations
Abstract
Inputs
Abstract
Outputs
Concrete
Inputs
Concrete
Output
Fig. 4: Components involved in the testing process
with formal veriﬁcation of requirements, both at runtime and also oﬄine us-
ing learned models. This combination has been pioneered by Peled et al. [26]
and called black-box checking. More generally, approaches that use automata
learning for testing are also referred to as Learning-Based Testing (LBT) [24].
3
Methodology
Our goal is to learn a behavior model capturing the targeted behavior of a hybrid
SUL. The model’s response to a trajectory of input variables, (e. g., sensor infor-
mation), shall conform to the SUL’s response with high accuracy and precision.
As in discrete systems, purely random generation of input trajectories is unlikely
to exercise the SUL’s state space adequately. Consequently, models learned from
random traces cannot accurately capture the SUL’s behavior. Therefore, we pro-
pose to apply automata learning followed by MBT to collect system traces while
using a machine learning method (i. e., Recurrent Neural Networks) for model
learning. Figure 1 shows a generalized version of our approach.
Our trace-generation approach does not require any knowledge, like random
sampling, but may beneﬁt from domain knowledge and speciﬁed requirements.
For instance, we do not explore states any further, which already violate safety
requirements. In the following, we will ﬁrst discuss the testing process. This in-
cludes interaction with the SUL, abstraction, automata learning and test-case
generation. Then, we discuss learning a behavior model in the form of a Recur-
rent Neural Network with training data collected by executing tests.
Back to Motivating Example. We learn a behavior model for our pla-
tooning scenario in three steps: (1) automata learning exploring a discretized
platooning control system to capture the state space structure in learned mod-
els, (2) MBT exploring the state space of the learned model directed towards
targeted behavior while collecting non-discrete system traces. In step (3), we
generalize from those trace by learning a Recurrent Neural Network.
3.1
Testing Process
We apply various test-case generation methods, with the same underlying ab-
straction and execution framework. Figure 4 depicts the components implement-
ing the testing process.
– Test-Case Generator: the test-case generator creates abstract test cases.
These test-cases are generated oﬄine as sequences of abstract inputs.
– Tester: the tester takes an input sequence and passes it to the mapper. Feed-
back from test-case execution is forwarded to the test-case generator.
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
7
– Mapper: the mapper maps each abstract input to a concrete input variable
valuation and a duration, deﬁning how long the input should be applied.
Concrete output variable valuations observed during testing are mapped to
abstract outputs. Each test sequence produces an abstract output sequence
which is returned to the tester.
– Test Driver & Hybrid System: The test driver interacts with the hybrid
system by setting input variables and sampling output variable values.
3.1.1
System Interface and Sampling. We assume a system interface com-
prising two sets of real-valued variables: input variables U and observable output
variables Y , with U further partitioned into controllable variables UC and uncon-
trollable, observable input variables UE aﬀected by the environment. We denote
all observable variables by Obs = Y ∪UE. Additionally, we assume the ability to
reset the SUL, as all test runs for trace generation need to start from a unique
initial state. During testing, we change the controllable variables UC and observe
the evolution of variable valuations at ﬁxed sampling intervals of length ts.
Back to Motivating Example. We implemented our platooning SUL
in MathWorks Simulink R⃝. The implementation actually models a platoon of
remote-controlled trucks used in our testbed at the Automated Driving Lab,
therefore the acceleration values and distance have been downsized. The SUL
interface comprises: UC = {acc}, Y = {d, vl, vf}, and UE = {∆}. The leader ac-
celeration ‘acc’ is the single controllable input with values ranging from −1.5m/s2
to 1.5m/s2, the distance between leader and ﬁrst follower is ‘d’ and ‘vl’ and ‘vf’
are the velocities of the leader and the follower, respectively; ﬁnally ‘∆’ denotes
the angle between the leader and the x-axis in a ﬁxed coordinate systems given
in radians, i. e., it represents the orientation of the leader that changes while
driving around curves. We sampled values of these variables at ﬁxed discrete
time steps, which are ts = 250 milliseconds apart.
3.1.2
Abstraction. We discretize variable valuations for testing via the map-
per. With that, we eﬀectively abstract the hybrid system such that a Mealy
machine over an abstract alphabet can model it. Each abstract input is mapped
to a concrete valuation for UC and a duration specifying how long the valuation
shall be applied, thus UC only takes values from a ﬁnite set. In contrast, values
of observable variables Obs are not restricted to a ﬁnite set. Therefore, we group
concrete valuations of Obs and assign an abstract output label to each group.
The mapper also deﬁnes a set of labels Violations containing abstract outputs
that signal violations of assumptions or safety requirements. In the abstraction
to a Mealy machine, these outputs lead to trap states from which the model
does not transit away. Such a policy prunes the abstract state space.
A mapper has ﬁve components: (1) an abstract input alphabet I, (2) a cor-
responding concretization function γ, (3) an abstraction function α mapping
concrete output values to (4) an abstract output alphabet O, and (5) the set
Violations. During testing, it performs the following two actions:
8
B. K. Aichernig et al.
– Input Concretization: the mapper maps an abstract symbol i ∈I to a pair
γ(i) = (ν, d), where ν is a valuation of UC and d ∈N deﬁning time steps, for
how long UC is set according to ν. This pair is passed to the test driver.
– Output Abstraction: the mapper receives concrete valuations ν of Obs from
the test driver and maps them to an abstract output symbol o = α(ν) in O
that is passed to the tester. If o ∈Violations, then the mapper stores o in its
state and maps all subsequent concrete outputs to o until it is reset.
The mapper state needs to be reset before every test-case execution. Repeat-
ing the same symbol o ∈Violations, if we have seen it once, creates trap states to
prune the abstract state space. Furthermore, the implementation of the mapper
contains a cache, returning abstract output sequences without SUL interaction.
Back to Motivating Example. We tested the SUL with six abstract in-
puts I: fast-acc, slow-acc, const, constl, brake and hard-brake, concretized by
γ(fast-acc) = (acc 7→1.5m/s2, 2), γ(slow-acc) = (acc 7→0.7m/s2, 2), γ(const) =
(acc 7→0, 2), γ(constl) = (acc 7→0, 8), γ(brake) = (acc 7→−0.7m/s2, 2), and
γ(hard-brake) = (acc 7→−1.5m/s2, 2).Thus, each input takes two time steps,
except for constl, which represents prolonged driving at constant speed.
The output abstraction depends on the distance d and the leader velocity vl.
If vl is negative, we map to the abstract output reverse. Otherwise, we partition
d into 7 ranges with one abstract output per range, e. g., the range (−∞, 0.43m)
(length of a remote-controlled truck) is mapped to crash. We assume that pla-
toons do not drive in reverse. Therefore, we include reverse in Violations, such
that once we observe reverse, we ignore the subsequent behavior. We also added
crash to Violations, as we are only interested in the behavior leading to a crash.
3.1.3
Test-Case Execution. The concrete test execution is implemented by
a test driver. It basically generates step-function-shaped inputs signals for input
variables and samples output variable values. For each concrete input (νj, dj)
applied at time tj (starting at t1 = 0ms), the test driver sets UC according to νj
for dj · ts milliseconds and samples the values ν′
j of observable variables Y ∪UE
at time tj + dj · ts −ts/2. It then proceeds to time tj+1 = tj + dj · ts to perform
the next input if there is any. In that way, the test driver creates a sequence of
sampled output variable values ν′
j, one for each concrete input. This sequence is
passed to the mapper for output abstraction.
3.1.4
Viewing Hybrid Systems as Mealy Machines. Our test-case exe-
cution samples exactly one output value for each input, ts/2 milliseconds before
the next input, which ensures that there is an output for each input, such that
input and output sequences have the same length. Given an abstract input se-
quence πi our test-case execution produces an output sequence πo of the same
length. In slight abuse of notation, we denote this relationship by λh(πi) = πo.
Hence, we view the hybrid system under test on an abstract level as a Mealy
machine Hm with obsHm = {⟨πi, λh(πi)⟩|πi ∈I∗}.
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
9
3.1.5
Learning Automata of Motivating Example. We applied the active
automata learning algorithm by Kearns and Vazirani (KV) [18], implemented
by LearnLib [17], in combination with the transition-coverage testing strategy
described in previous work [3]. We have chosen the KV algorithm, as it requires
fewer output queries to generate a new hypothesis model than, e. g., L∗[4],
such that more equivalence queries are performed. As a result, we can guide
testing during equivalence queries more often. The Transition-Coverage Based
Testing (TCBT) strategy is discussed below in Section 3.1.6.
Here, our goal is not to learn an accurate model, but to explore the SUL’s
state space systematically through automata learning. The learned hypothesis
models basically keep track of what has already been tested. Automata learning
operates in rounds, alternating between series of output queries and equivalence
queries. We stop this process once we performed the maximum number of tests
Nautl, which includes both output queries and test queries implementing equiva-
lence queries. Due to the large state space of the analyzed platooning SUL, it was
infeasable to learn a complete model, hence we stopped learning when reaching
the bound Nautl, even though further tests could have revealed discrepancies.
Back to Motivating Example. The learned automata also provided in-
sights into the behavior of the platooning SUL. A manual analysis revealed that
collisions are more likely to occur, if trucks drive at constant speed for several
time steps. Since we aimed at testing and analyzing the SUL with respect to dan-
gerous situations, we created the additional abstract constl input, which initially
was not part of the set of abstract inputs.
During active automata learning we executed approximately Nautl260000
concrete tests on the platooning SUL in 841 learning rounds, producing 2841
collisions. In the last round, we generated a hypothesis Mealy machine with
6011 states that we use for model-based testing.
3.1.6
Test-Case Generation. In the following, we describe random test-case
generation for Mealy machines, which serves as a baseline. Then, we describe
three diﬀerent approaches to model-based test-case generation. Note that our
testing goal is to explore the system’s state space and to generate system traces
with high coverage, with the intention of learning a neural network. Therefore,
we generate a ﬁxed number of test cases Ntrain and do not impose conditions on
outputs other than those deﬁned by the set Violations in the mapper.
3.1.6.1
Random Testing. Our random testing strategy generates input se-
quences with a length chosen uniformly at random between 1 and the maximum
length lmax. Inputs in the sequence are also chosen uniformly at random from I.
3.1.6.2
Learning-Based Testing. The LBT strategy performs automata learn-
ing as described in Section 3.1.5. It produces exactly those tests executed during
automata learning and therefore sets Nautl to Ntrain. While this strategy system-
atically explores the abstract state space of the SUL, it also generates very simple
tests during the early rounds of learning, which are not helpful for learning a
behavior model in Section 3.2.
10
B. K. Aichernig et al.
Algorithm 1 Output-Directed test-case generator
Input: M = ⟨I, O, Q, q0, δ, λ⟩, label ∈O, Ntrain
Output: TestCases : a set of test cases directed to ‘label ∈O’
1: TestCases ←∅
2: while |TestCases| < Ntrain do
3:
rand-len ←RandomInteger
4:
preﬁx ←RandomSequence(I, rand-len)
5:
qr ←δ∗(q0, preﬁx)
6:
q′
r ←RandomState(Q)
7:
interﬁx ←PathToState(qr, q′
r)
▷input sequence to q′
r
8:
if interﬁx ̸= ⊥then
9:
suﬃx ←PathToLabel(qr, label)
▷input sequence to label
10:
if suﬃx ̸= ⊥then
11:
TestCases ←TestCases ∪{preﬁx · interﬁx · suﬃx}
3.1.6.3
Transition-Coverage Based Testing. The Transition-Coverage Based
Testing (TCBT) strategy uses a learned model of the SUL as basis. Basically, we
learn a model, ﬁx that model and then generate Ntrain test sequences with the
transition-coverage testing strategy discussed in [3]. We use it, as it performed
well in automata learning and it scales to large automata. The intuition behind
it is that the combination of variability through randomization and coverage-
guided testing is well-suited in a black-box setting as in automata learning.
Test-case generation from a Mealy machine M with this strategy is split
into two phases, a generation phase and a selection phase. The generation phase
generates a large number of tests by performing random walks through M. In the
selection phase, n tests are selected to optimize the coverage of the transitions of
M. Since the n required to cover all transitions may be much lower than Ntrain,
we performed several rounds, alternating between generation and selection until
we selected and executed Ntrain test cases.
3.1.6.4
Output-Directed Testing. Our Output-Directed Testing strategy also
combines random walks with coverage-guided testing, but aims at covering a
given abstract output ‘label’. Therefore, it is based on a learned Mealy machine
of the SUL. A set consisting of Ntrain tests is generated by Algorithm 1. All tests
consist of a random ‘preﬁx’ that leads to a random source state qr, an ‘interﬁx’
leading to a randomly chosen destination state q′
r and a ‘suﬃx’ from q′
r to the
‘label’.
Back to Motivating Example. In our platooning scenario, we aim at
covering behavior relevant to collisions, thus we generally set label = crash and
refer to the corresponding test strategy also as Crash-Directed Testing.
3.2
Learning a Behavior Model
3.2.1
Recurrent Neural Networks In our scenario, we are given length T
sequences of vectors X = (x1, . . . , xT ) with xi ∈Rdx representing the inputs to
the hybrid system, and the task is to predict corresponding length T sequences
of target vectors T = (t1, . . . , tT ) with ti ∈Rdy representing the outputs of
the hybrid system. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a popular choice for
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
11
modelling these kinds of problems. In the simplest case, a plain RNN with one
hidden layer of dh neurons consists of three sets of weight matrices Wx ∈Rdh×dx,
Wh ∈Rdh×dh, and Wy ∈Rdy×dh and two bias vectors bh ∈Rdh and by ∈Rdy
which we collectively denote as Θ = (Wx, Wh, Wy, bh, by). The RNN deﬁnes
a function Y(X) = (y1, . . . , yT ) recursively as
yi = Wyhi + by,
(1)
where hi denotes the hidden state vector at time i computed as
hi = σ(Wxxi + Whhi−1 + bh),
(2)
where we deﬁne h0 = 0 and σ is an arbitrary non-linear function, e.g., σ(·) =
tanh(·). The RNN architecture is depicted in Fig. 5. Given a set of N training
input/output sequence pairs D = {(Xn, Tn)}N
n=1, the task of machine learning is
to ﬁnd suitable parameters Θ such that the output sequences {Yn}N
n=1 computed
by the RNN for input sequences {Xn}N
n=1 closely match their corresponding
target sequences {Tn}N
n=1, and, more importantly, generalize well to sequences
that are not part of the training set D, i.e., the RNN produces accurate results
on unseen data.
To obtain suitable RNN parameters Θ, we typically minimize a loss function
describing the misﬁt between predictions Y and ground truth targets T. A
common loss function for real-valued target values T is the mean-squared error
(MSE) loss deﬁned by
l(Θ, D) = 1
N
N
X
n=1
T
X
i=1
∥yi(xi, Θ) −ti∥2.
(3)
Minimizing (3) can be achieved by gradient descent, i.e., by iteratively correcting
the current parameters Θ into the direction of steepest descent,
Θ ←Θ −η ∇Θl(Θ, D),
(4)
where η is the learning rate that determines how much the parameters Θ are
changed in each iteration. Since we expect the loss function to decrease in each
iteration, we obtain an RNN that gradually produces more accurate predictions
on the training set D. However, computing the gradient for the entire data set is
computationally prohibitive if N is large. In practice, it turns out that stochastic
gradients computed more eﬃciently from smaller subsets of the training data,
called mini-batches, are suﬃcient to decrease the loss function to obtain a well-
performing RNN. To this end, the entire training data is split randomly into
mini-batches such that several iterations of (4) are performed with randomly
selected subsets from D. After processing the entire data, i.e., a training epoch,
the training set is split diﬀerently into a random set of mini-batches to con-
tinue with the next epoch. This minimization procedure is known as stochastic
gradient descent.
Back to Motivating Example. In our platooning scenario, the inputs
xi ∈R2 at time step i to the hybrid system comprise the input variables U
12
B. K. Aichernig et al.
h1
h2
. . .
hT
Wh
Wh
Wh
x1
x2
. . .
xT
Wx
Wx
Wx
y1
y2
. . .
yT
Wy
Wy
Wy
Fig. 5: Recurrent neural network. The output yi of the RNN at time step i does
not only depend on the input xi at time step i, but also on the accumulated
knowledge in the hidden state vector hi−1 at the previous time step i −1.
from Section 3.1.1, i.e., the acceleration value acc and the orientation ∆of the
leader car in radians. We preprocess the orientation ∆to contain the angular
diﬀerence of orientation in radians ∆i −∆i−1 of consecutive time steps to get
rid of discontinuities when these values are constrained to a ﬁxed interval of
length 2π. The outputs yi ∈R3 at time step i of the hybrid system comprise
the values of observable output variables Y from Section 3.1.1, i. e., the velocity
of the leader vl and the ﬁrst follower vf, respectively, as well as the distance d
between the leader and the ﬁrst follower.
Furthermore, we scale and shift each input and output dimension, respec-
tively, to have zero-mean and unit variance across all N training samples and T
time steps. This is necessary as otherwise single input dimensions whose range is
larger than the range of other dimensions tend to dominate the prediction pro-
cess. The same is true for the output values since here the loss function (3) could
be dominated by a few output dimensions whose range is large. For prediction,
the outputs of the neural networks are merely scaled and shifted inversely to
their original range.
RNNs as deﬁned in (1)–(2) are not constrained to sequences of a ﬁxed length.
However, from a practical perspective, training ﬁxed-length sequences is substan-
tially more eﬃcient as state-of-the-art machine learning frameworks rely on GPU
computation that exhibits its full parallelization potential only if data is stored
in homogeneous data arrays, i.e., large tensors where all data samples are of the
same size. Hence, during test case generation, we perform sequence padding at
the end of the sequence by setting acc = 0 resulting in the leader to continue
driving at approximately constant speed depending on its current orientation ∆
and observing the output of the hybrid system. In rare cases the generated test
sequences result in awkward behavior that needed to be truncated at some time
step, e.g., when the leaders velocity vl became negative. For these sequences,
we perform a padding at the beginning of the sequence by copying the initial
state where all cars have zero velocity. We used this padding procedure to obtain
ﬁxed-length sequences with T = 256.
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
13
In our experiments we use RNNs with one hidden layer of 100 neurons.
However, since plain RNNs as described in Section 3.2.1 are well-known to lack
the ability to model long-term dependencies, we use long short-term memory
(LSTM) cells for the hidden layers [14]. LSTM cells are neurons equipped with
an internal state and a mechanism that allows to forget, overwrite, or to keep this
state for several time steps to model long-term dependencies. This functionality
comes at the cost of additional weight matrices that increase the number of
parameters Θ. For details, the interested reader is referred to [14].
To evaluate the quality of the generated training sequences, we train models
for several values of training set sizes Ntrain. We used ADAM [19] implemented
in Keras [6] with a learning rate η = 10−3 to perform stochastic gradient de-
scent for 500 epochs. The number of training sequences per mini-batch is set to
min(Ntrain/100, 500), i.e., equally many parameter updates per epoch are per-
formed according to (4) up to Ntrain = 50000 to enhance comparability. Each
experiment is performed ten times using diﬀerent random initial parameters Θ
and we report the average performance measures over these ten runs.
4
Experimental Evaluations
Predicting crashes with RNNs. We aim to predict whether a sequence of
input values results in a crash, i.e., we are dealing with a binary classiﬁcation
problem. A sequence is predicted as positive, i.e., the sequence contains a crash,
if at any time step the leader-follower distance d gets below a certain threshold.
For the evaluation, we generated validation sequences with the Output-
Directed Testing strategy. This strategy results in sequences that contain crashes
more frequently than the other testing strategies which is useful to keep the class
imbalance between crash and non-crash sequences in the validation set minimal.
We emphasize that these validation sequences do not overlap with the training
sequences that were used to train the LSTM-RNN with Output-Directed Testing
sequences. The validation set 1 contains Nval = 86800 sequences out of which
17092 (19.7%) result in a crash.
For the reported scores of our binary classiﬁcation task we ﬁrst deﬁne:
True Positive (TP):
#{ positive sequences predicted as positive }
False Positive (FP):
#{ negative sequences predicted as positive }
True Negative (TN): #{negative sequences predicted as negative}
False Negative (FN): #{ positive sequences predicted as negative}
We report the following four measures: (1) the classiﬁcation error (CE) in %,
(2) the true positive rate (TPR), (3) the positive predictive value (PPV), and
1 This set is usually called test set in the context of machine learning, but here we
adopt the term validation set to avoid confusion with model-based testing.
14
B. K. Aichernig et al.
(4) the F1-score (F1). These scores are deﬁned as
CE = FP + FN
Nval
× 100
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
PPV =
TP
TP + FP
F1 =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
The TPR and the PPV suﬀer from the unfavorable property that they result
in unreasonably high values if the LSTM-RNN simply classiﬁes all sequences
either as positive or negative. The F1-score is essentially the harmonic mean of
the TPR and the PPV so that these odd cases are ruled out. Note that while for
the CE a smaller value indicates a better performance, for the other scores TPR,
PPV, and F1 a higher score, i. e., closer to 1, indicates a better performance.
The average results and the standard deviations over ten runs for these scores
are shown in Fig. 6. The LSTM-RNNs trained with sequences from Random
Testing and LBT perform poorly on all scores especially if the number of training
sequences Ntrain is small. Notably, we found that sequences generated by LBT
during early rounds of automata learning are short and do not contain a lot of
variability, explaining the poor performance of LBT for low Ntrain.
We can observe in Fig. 6b that Random Testing and LBT perform poorly
at detecting crashes when they actually occur. Especially the performance drop
of LBT at Ntrain = 10000 and of Random Testing at Ntrain = 100000 indicate
that additional training sequences do not necessarily improve the capability to
detect crashes as crashes in these sequences still appear to be outliers.
Training LSTM-RNNs with TCBT and Output-Directed Testing outper-
forms Random Testing and LBT for all training set sizes Ntrain, where the
results slightly favor Output-Directed Testing. The advantage of TCBT and
Output-Directed Testing becomes evident when comparing the training set size
Ntrain required to achieve the performance that Random Testing achieves us-
ing the maximum of Ntrain = 200000 sequences. The CE of Random Testing
at Ntrain = 200000 is 7.23% which LBT outperforms at Ntrain = 100000 with
6.36%, TCBT outperforms at Ntrain = 1000 with 6.16%, and Output-Directed
Testing outperforms at Ntrain = 500 with 5.22%. Comparing LBT and Output-
Directed Testing, Output-Directed Testing outperforms the 2.77% CE of LBT
at Ntrain = 200000 with only Ntrain = 5000 sequences to achieve a 2.55% CE.
The F1-score is improved similarly: Random Testing with Ntrain = 200000
achieves 0.809, while TCBT achieves 0.830 using only Ntrain = 1000 sequences,
and Output-Directed Testing achieves 0.865 using only Ntrain = 500 sequences.
Comparing LBT and Output-Directed Testing, LBT achieves 0.929 at Ntrain =
200000 whereas Output-Directed Testing requires only Ntrain = 5000 to achieve
a F1-score of 0.936. In total, the sample size eﬃciency of TCBT and Output-
Directed Testing is two to three orders of magnitudes larger than for Random
Testing and LBT.
Evaluation of the Detected Crash Times. In the next experiment, we
evaluate the accuracy of the crash prediction time. The predicted crash time
is the earliest time step at which d drops below the threshold, and the crash
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
15
100
200
500
1k
2k
5k
10k
20k
50k
100k 200k
0%
10%
20%
30%
Ntrain
CE
Random
Learning-Based
Transition-Coverage
Output-Directed
(a) Classiﬁcation Error (CE)
100
200
500
1k
2k
5k
10k
20k
50k
100k 200k
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Ntrain
TPR
Random
Learning-Based
Transition-Coverage
Output-Directed
(b) True Positive Rate (TPR)
100
200
500
1k
2k
5k
10k
20k
50k
100k 200k
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Ntrain
PPV
Random
Learning-Based
Transition-Coverage
Output-Directed
(c) Positive Predictive Value (PPV)
100
200
500
1k
2k
5k
10k
20k
50k
100k 200k
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Ntrain
F1
Random
Learning-Based
Transition-Coverage
Output-Directed
(d) F1-score (F1)
Fig. 6: Performance measures for all testing strategies over changing Ntrain.
detection time error is the absolute diﬀerence between the ground truth crash
time and the predicted crash time. Please note that the crash detection time
error is only meaningful for true positive sequences.
Fig. 7 shows cumulative distribution function (CDF) plots describing how
the crash detection time error distributes over the true positive sequences. It is
desired that the CDF exhibits a steep increase at the beginning which implies
that most of the crashes are detected close to the ground truth crash time. The
CDF value at crash detection time error 0 indicates the percentage of sequences
whose crash is detected without error at the correct time step.
As expected the results get better for larger training sizes Ntrain. Random
Testing and LBT exhibit large errors and only relatively few sequences are clas-
siﬁed without error. For Random Testing, less than 30% of the crashes in the
true positive sequences are classiﬁed correctly using the maximum of Ntrain =
200000 sequences. On the other side, TCBT requires only Ntrain = 20000 se-
quences to classify 34.9% correctly, and Output-Directed Testing requires only
Ntrain = 2000 to classify 41.8% correctly. Combining the results from Fig. 7 with
the TPR shown in Fig. 6b strengthens the crash prediction quality even more:
While TCBT and Output-Directed Testing do not only achieve a higher TPR,
they also predict the crashes more accurately. Furthermore, TCBT and Output-
Directed Testing classify 90.9% and 97.3% of the sequences with at most one
time step error using the maximum of Ntrain = 200000 sequences, respectively.
5
Related Work
Verifying Platooning Strategies.
Meinke [23] used LBT to analyze vehicle pla-
tooning systems from the perspective of qualitative safety properties, such as
16
B. K. Aichernig et al.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Crash Detection Time Error
Cumulative Distribution
200
2k
20k
200k
(a) Random
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Crash Detection Time Error
Cumulative Distribution
200
2k
20k
200k
(b) Learning-Based Testing
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Crash Detection Time Error
Cumulative Distribution
200
2k
20k
200k
(c) Transition Coverage
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Crash Detection Time Error
Cumulative Distribution
200
2k
20k
200k
(d) Output-Directed
Fig. 7: CDF plots for the diﬀerence between true crash time and predicted crash
time for sequences that are correctly classiﬁed as resulting in a crash. Results
are shown for all testing strategies and several training dataset sizes Ntrain.
vehicle collisions. The intentions and motivations behind [23] are: (1) to show
how well a multi-core implementation of LBT method scales, and (2) how prob-
lem size and other factors aﬀect scalability. Similar to our approach, the au-
thor learned the platooning system by incorporating it as a Software-In-the-
Loop (SIL) in the learning phase. Experiments showed promising scalability re-
sults. He has successfully generated testcases for an invariant property specifying
the optimal distance between vehicles in a one–dimension platooning scenario,
meaning that he used no steering model. We believe that since testing and ver-
iﬁcation of the platooning control strategy were not the primary intentions of
the author, and because the experimental results already fulﬁlled the primary
purposes of the author, no further investigations were made to explain why the
learned models did not generalize wellIt is explicitly stated in [23, p. 13] that the
learned models agree with the platoon control strategy at most up to 9.4% of
traces. This indicates the learned models do not provide a good generalization
of collision scenarios and thus cannot be used as to predict vehicle collisions.
Fermi et al. [11] showed how to derive sensitivity of safety conditions in
vehicle platooning strategies using rule inference methods. They have used the
Plexe simulator to generate a dataset of a platoon control strategy on which
they deﬁned a prediction problem by setting a supervised learning method to
distinguish safe and unsafe platooning conditions. More speciﬁcally, they used
Decision Tree (DT) as the classiﬁer, and they suggested three approaches to
minimize the number of false negatives. First, manual inspection of inferred
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
17
rules based on the analysis in [5] using two or three highest ranked features of
their dataset, which is labor intensive. Second, they used Logic Learning Machine
(LLM) to infer the set of rules distinguishing types of platooning conditions with
a safe margin knowing they are training LLM with zero error. This approach
is too conservative and does not provide a good generalization. Finally, they
introduced a semi-automatic approach based on the principle of κ–fold cross-
validation. The authors divided the dataset into κ–folds and trained a model
with a non–zero margins (e. g., 5%) and inferred a set of rules identifying safe
platooning conditions and manually inspected false negative conditions reﬁning
the learned model. They used False Positive Rate (FPR) and False Negative
Rate (FNR) for validation of the reliability of the prediction.
Rashid et al. [29] used higher-order logic to model a generalized platoon con-
troller formally. Their modeling formalism incorporates the physical analysis of
the platoon using multivariate calculus and Laplace transform. They also speci-
ﬁed the platoon stability formally and then used HOL Light to verify important
stability constraints for arbitrary platoon parameters. The veriﬁcation approach
results in stability theorems; therefore, it provides a more general analysis com-
pared to both simulation-based approaches (i. e., where veriﬁcation only holds
for the applied test cases) and automata-theoretic veriﬁcation approaches (i. e.,
modeling platoon control strategies by a discrete–time model using automata).
On the other hand, this veriﬁcation approach requires manual modeling of the
platoon controller; that is, it only ensures the correctness of an abstract model.
For this reason, the authors investigated methods to translate the stability theo-
rems resulted from the veriﬁcation approach into runtime monitors to detect the
violations of any stability constraints and runtime enforcement of correct strate-
gies. Finally, we believe since the runtime monitors are a byproduct of manually
crafted models of the platoon controllers there is no prior knowledge about how
well they perform in practice.
System Identiﬁcation and State Estimation. Determining models by using input-
output data is known as system identiﬁcation in the control systems commu-
nity [20]. Such models can be useful for simulation, controller design or diagnosis
purposes. Recently, progress towards system identiﬁcation techniques for hybrid
systems based on the classical methods presented e.g. in the book of Ljung [20]
has been made, see [38] and the references therein. In [38], single-input single-
output models are considered. Furthermore, the contribution focuses on so-called
piece-wise aﬃne ARX models. We believe that the presented hybrid automata
learning techniques could essentially contribute to this research ﬁeld by relaxing
some of the modeling assumptions.
If the model parameters and the switching mechanism is known, the prob-
lem reduces to a hybrid state estimation problem [21, 35]. Such estimators or
observers are used in various problems, i.e. closed loop control, parameter es-
timation or diagnosis. However, the traditional methods often assume accurate
and exact models. These models are mostly derived based on ﬁrst principles [21],
which is often not feasible in complex scenarios. This shows the advantage of our
learning-based approach especially in cases without detailed model knowledge.
18
B. K. Aichernig et al.
6
Future Work & Conclusion
We successfully combined abstract automata learning, MBT, and machine learn-
ing to learn a behavior model from observations of a hybrid system. Given a
black-box hybrid system, we learn an abstract automaton capturing its dis-
cretized state-space; then, we use MBT to target a behavior of interest. This
results in test suites with high coverage of the targeted behavior from which we
generate a behavioral dataset. LSTM-RNNs are used to learn behavior models
from the behavioral dataset. Advantages of our approach are demonstrated on
a real-world case study; i. e., a platooning scenario. Experimental evaluations
show that LSTM-RNNs learned with model-based data generation achieved sig-
niﬁcantly better results compared to models learned from randomly generated
data, e. g., reducing the classiﬁcation error by a factor of ﬁve, or achieving a
relatively similar F1-score with up to three orders of magnitude fewer training
samples than random testing. This is accomplished through systematic testing
(i. e., automata learning, and MBT) of a black-box hybrid system without re-
quiring a priori knowledge on its dynamics.
Motivated by the promising results shown in Sect. 4, we plan to carry out fur-
ther case studies. For future research, we target runtime veriﬁcation and runtime
enforcement of safety properties for hybrid systems. To this end, we conjecture
that a predictive behavior model enables eﬀective runtime monitoring, which
allows us to issue warnings or to intervene in case of likely safety violations.
Acknowledgment. This work is supported by the TU Graz LEAD project “De-
pendable Internet of Things in Adverse Environments”. It is also partially sup-
ported by ECSEL Joint Undertaking under Grant No.: 692455.
References
1. Aarts, F., Heidarian, F., Kuppens, H., Olsen, P., Vaandrager, F.W.: Automata
learning through counterexample guided abstraction reﬁnement. In: FM (2012)
2. Aichernig, B.K., Mostowski, W., Mousavi, M.R., Tappler, M., Taromirad, M.:
Model learning and model-based testing. In: Bennaceur, A., H¨ahnle, R., Meinke,
K. (eds.) Machine Learning for Dynamic Software Analysis: Potentials and Limits
- International Dagstuhl Seminar 16172, Dagstuhl Castle, Germany, April 24-27,
2016, Revised Papers. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11026, pp. 74–100.
Springer (2018). , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96562-8_3
3. Aichernig, B.K., Tappler, M.: Eﬃcient active automata learning via mutation test-
ing. Journal of Automated Reasoning (Oct 2018).
4. Angluin, D.: Learning regular sets from queries and counterexamples. Inf. Comput.
(1987)
5. Cangelosi, D., Muselli, M., Parodi, S., Blengio, F., Becherini, P., Versteeg, R.,
Conte, M., Varesio, L.: Use of attribute driven incremental discretization and logic
learning machine to build a prognostic classiﬁer for neuroblastoma patients. BMC
Bioinformatics 15, S4 (2014)
6. Chollet, F., et al.: Keras. https://keras.io (2015)
Learning a Behavior Model of Hybrid Systems
19
7. Chow, T.S.: Testing software design modeled by ﬁnite-state machines. IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering 4(3), 178–187 (May 1978).
8. Derler, P., Lee, E.A., Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, A.L.: Modeling cyber-physical sys-
tems. Proceedings of the IEEE 100(1), 13–28 (2012). , https://doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC.2011.2160929
9. Dolk, V.S., Ploeg, J., Heemels, W.P.M.H.: Event-triggered control for string-
stable vehicle platooning. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems 18(12), 3486–3500 (Dec 2017).
10. Duan, Y., Chen, X., Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., Abbeel, P.: Benchmarking
deep reinforcement learning for continuous control. In: Balcan, M., Weinberger,
K.Q. (eds.) ICML 2016. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, vol. 48,
pp. 1329–1338. JMLR.org (2016), http://jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/v48/
duan16.html
11. Fermi, A., Mongelli, M., Muselli, M., Ferrari, E.: Identiﬁcation of safety regions in
vehicle platooning via machine learning. In: WFCS (2018)
12. Fujiwara, S., von Bochmann, G., Khendek, F., Amalou, M., Ghedamsi, A.: Test
selection based on ﬁnite state models. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
17(6), 591–603 (1991).
13. Henzinger, T.A.: The theory of hybrid automata. In: LICS (1996)
14. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J.: Long short-term memory. Neural Computation
9(8), 1735–1780 (1997)
15. Howar, F., Steﬀen, B.: Active automata learning in practice - an annotated bib-
liography of the years 2011 to 2016. In: Machine Learning for Dynamic Software
Analysis: Potentials and Limits - International Dagstuhl Seminar 16172, Dagstuhl
Castle, Germany, April 24-27, 2016, Revised Papers. pp. 123–148 (2018)
16. Howar, F., Steﬀen, B., Merten, M.: From ZULU to RERS - lessons learned in the
ZULU challenge. In: ISoLA. pp. 687–704 (2010)
17. Isberner, M., Howar, F., Steﬀen, B.: The open-source LearnLib - A framework for
active automata learning. In: CAV. pp. 487–495 (2015)
18. Kearns, M.J., Vazirani, U.V.: An Introduction to Computational Learning Theory.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA (1994)
19. Kingma, D., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In: International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2015), arXiv: 1412.6980
20. Ljung, L.: System Identiﬁcation: Theory for the User, PTR Prentice Hall Informa-
tion and System Sciences Series. Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1999)
21. Lv, C., Liu, Y., Hu, X., Guo, H., Cao, D., Wang, F.: Simultaneous observation of
hybrid states for cyber-physical systems: A case study of electric vehicle powertrain.
IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 48(8), 2357–2367 (Aug 2018).
22. Manna, Z., Pnueli, A.: Verifying hybrid systems. In: Hybrid Systems (1992)
23. Meinke, K.: Learning-based testing of cyber-physical systems-of-systems: A pla-
tooning study. In: EPEW (2017)
24. Meinke, K.: Learning-based testing: Recent progress and future prospects. In: Ben-
naceur, A., H¨ahnle, R., Meinke, K. (eds.) Machine Learning for Dynamic Soft-
ware Analysis: Potentials and Limits - International Dagstuhl Seminar 16172,
Dagstuhl Castle, Germany, April 24-27, 2016, Revised Papers. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 11026, pp. 53–73. Springer (2018). , https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-96562-8_2
25. O’Shea, T.J., Hoydis, J.: An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer.
IEEE Trans. Cogn. Comm. & Networking 3(4), 563–575 (2017). , https://doi.
org/10.1109/TCCN.2017.2758370
20
B. K. Aichernig et al.
26. Peled, D.A., Vardi, M.Y., Yannakakis, M.: Black box checking. Journal of Au-
tomata, Languages and Combinatorics 7(2), 225–246 (2002). , https://doi.org/
10.25596/jalc-2002-225
27. Ploeg, J., Shukla, D.P., van de Wouw, N., Nijmeijer, H.: Controller synthesis for
string stability of vehicle platoons. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems 15(2), 854–865 (April 2014).
28. Punjani, A., Abbeel, P.: Deep learning helicopter dynamics models. In: IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation, ICRA 2015, Seattle, WA, USA,
26-30 May, 2015. pp. 3223–3230. IEEE (2015). , https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.
2015.7139643
29. Rashid, A., Siddique, U., Hasan, O.: Formal veriﬁcation of platoon control strate-
gies. In: SEFM (2018)
30. Rupp, A., Steinberger, M., Horn, M.: Sliding mode based platooning with non-zero
initial spacing errors. IEEE Control Systems Letters 1(2), 274–279 (Oct 2017).
31. Shahbaz, M., Groz, R.: Inferring Mealy machines. In: FM (2009)
32. Simpson, T., Booker, A., Ghosh, D., Giunta, A., Koch, P., Yang, R.J.: Ap-
proximation methods in multidisciplinary analysis and optimization: a panel dis-
cussion. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 27(5), 302–313 (2004). ,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-004-0389-9
33. Smeenk, W., Moerman, J., Vaandrager, F.W., Jansen, D.N.: Applying automata
learning to embedded control software. In: ICFEM (2015)
34. Spielberg, S., Gopaluni, R.B., Loewen, P.D.: Deep reinforcement learning ap-
proaches for process control. 2017 6th International Symposium on Advanced Con-
trol of Industrial Processes (AdCONIP) pp. 201–206 (2017)
35. Tanwani, A., Shim, H., Liberzon, D.: Observability for switched linear systems:
Characterization and observer design. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control
58(4), 891–904 (apr 2013).
36. Vaandrager, F.W.: Model learning. Commun. ACM (2017)
37. Vasilevskii, M.P.: Failure diagnosis of automata. Cybernetics 9(4), 653–665 (1973).
38. Vidal, R., Ma, Y., Sastry, S.S.: Hybrid system identiﬁcation. In: Interdisciplinary
Applied Mathematics, pp. 431–451. Springer New York (2016).
