Bayesian inference and role of astrocytes in amyloid-beta dynamics with
modelling of Alzheimer’s disease using clinical data
Hina Shaheena,∗, Roderick Melnika, The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiativeb
aMS2 Discovery Interdisciplinary Research Institute, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Canada
bData used in preparation of this article were generated by the Alzheimer’s Disease Metabolomics Consortium (ADMC). As such,
the investigators within the ADMC provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of
ADMC investigators can be found at: https://sites.duke.edu/adnimetab/team/
Abstract
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a prominent, worldwide, age-related neurodegenerative disease that currently
has no systemic treatment. The symptoms of AD indicate a loss of neuronal function in the human brain.
During the disease state, the intricate balance of connections between neurons, astrocytes, microglia, and
vascular cells that is required for normal brain function may become altered. Strong evidence suggests that
permeable amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) oligomers, astrogliosis and reactive astrocytosis cause neuronal damage
in AD. A large amount of Aβ is secreted by astrocytes, which contributes to the total Aβ deposition in
the brain. This suggests that astrocytes may also play a role in AD, leading to increased attention to their
dynamics and associated mechanisms. Although astrocytes are the most abundant type of brain cells, even
small amounts of Aβ production from a single astrocyte might have a significant impact on the health of
the entire brain. Importantly, a deeper understanding of enhanced astrocyte-neuron interaction might be
a potential objective for neuroscience researchers in order to create new therapies capable of modifying
astrocytes’ activity, reducing neurotoxic consequences, and increasing neuroprotective action. Therefore,
in the present study, we developed and evaluated novel stochastic models for Aβ growth using ADNI
data to predict the effect of astrocytes on AD progression in a clinical trial. In the AD case, accurate
prediction is required for a successful clinical treatment plan. Given that AD studies are observational in
nature and involve routine patient visits, stochastic models provide a suitable framework for modelling AD.
Using the approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) approach, the AD etiology may be modelled as a
multi-state disease process. As a result, we use this approach to examine the weak and strong influence
of astrocytes at multiple disease progression stages using ADNI data from the baseline to 2-year visits
for AD patients whose ages ranged from 50 to 90 years. Based on ADNI data, we discovered that the
strong astrocyte effect (i.e., a higher concentration of astrocytes as compared to Aβ) could help to lower
or clear the growth of Aβ, which is a key to slowing down AD progression. Interestingly, we found that
astrocytes whose concentration is less than Aβ increase the production of Aβ, which leads to enhanced
AD. The proposed model improves our understanding of astrocyte contributions to Aβ growth during AD,
which may result in more successful therapeutic approaches. Overall, the evidence strongly supports the
involvement of astrocytes in the pathogenesis of neurological disorders like AD, and targeting these cells
may hold a promising approach as a therapeutic strategy for such conditions.
Keywords: Large-scale brain, multiscale modelling, Alzheimer’s disease, astrocytes, Aβ growth,
stochastic models, inverse problems, data-driven methods, approximate Bayesian computation technique,
parameter estimation, neuroscience
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
June 23, 2023
arXiv:2306.12520v1  [q-bio.NC]  21 Jun 2023
1. Introduction
The human brain is a system with billions of neurons that is incredibly complex and is managed by cog-
nitive processes. Neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs), such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), are defined by a
progressive pathological transformation of the brain’s biochemical processes and anatomy, which eventu-
ally leads to permanent impairment of cognitive functioning [1]. Amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles,
neuropil threads, dystrophic neurites, cerebral amyloid angiopathy, and glial responses are examples of
“positive” lesions that accumulate in the brains of AD patients [2]. Plaques are extracellular deposits of the
amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) that are created when the amyloid precursor protein is sequentially cleaved by the
enzymes β-secretase and γ-secretase [3]. Years before AD symptoms appear, plaque begins to accumulate
in the neocortex, then moves on to the hippocampus, diencephalon, striatum, brainstem, and lastly the cere-
bellum [4]. The formation and deposition of the Aβ peptide are largely thought to be responsible for the
development of AD [5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
The temporal evolution and spatio-temporal distributions of Aβ in AD have been broadly characterized
ex vivo through neuropathologic studies utilizing Aβ immunostaining [4, 10]. In terms of the temporal
evolution of Aβ in AD, studies suggest that the accumulation of Aβ plaques in the brain may occur years or
even decades before the onset of clinical symptoms [11, 12, 13]. Moreover, Aβ has a regular spatiotemporal
distribution that is initially limited to a few specific brain regions, for instance, in the cerebral cortex of
patients with AD, before spreading further in the disease state [14, 15]. Importantly, the main hypothesis
that is often used is that Aβ growth starts in a limited number of affected brain areas and then spreads
to other brain regions during the course of the disease via mechanisms like prion-like self-propagation or
transsynaptic spread [10, 16, 17]. The in vivo regional Aβ concentration can be assessed in humans using
the ADNI database (https://adni.loni.usc.edu/). There have been large-cohort cross-sectional
studies on ADNI for Aβ growth, but the research in this context has mostly concentrated on identifying the
different clinical stages of the disease [18, 19]. The amount of knowledge on the evolution of Aβ plaques
over time is still quite limited, despite recent approvals by the FDA of two new drugs in 2021 (aducanumab)
and 2023 (lecanemab). In particular, longitudinal analysis has been limited to small time frames of no more
than two years or the average deposition throughout the whole brain [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. Therefore, as such,
the spatiotemporal distributions of Aβ have not been completely defined yet despite the huge number of in
vivo data that have been gathered and analyzed.
It is known that abnormal Aβ aggregation, astrogliosis, and reactive astrocytosis are major pathogenic
hallmarks of AD [25, 26]. Interestingly, astrocytes are essential for the glymphatic system and the blood-
brain barrier and play a significant part in synapse and the neuronal function [26, 27]. Astrocytes were
thought of as brain-supporting cells that provided nutrients and metabolic support for neurons. However,
because of their ability to sense changes in neuronal activity by releasing gliotransmitters and gliomodula-
tors and to control the availability of glutamate, GABA, and energy substrates, it is now well known that as-
trocytes play a crucial role in neuronal function [28, 29, 30, 31]. As a result, astrocytes are now understood
to play a critical role in long-term potentiation, neuronal circuit preservation, and synaptic transmission
[27, 32, 33]. Neurotoxic astrocytes and pro-inflammatory disease-associated microglia are spatially and bi-
ologically related to Aβ pathology. Indeed, previous research found that reactive astrocytes in AD cluster to
areas of degeneration or Aβ plaques [34, 35, 36]. Furthermore, astrocytes contain detectable levels of APP,
β-secretase, and γ-secretase, and the formulation of these proteins increases in reactive astrocytes under
∗Hina Shaheen
Email addresses: shah8322@mylaurier.ca (Hina Shaheen), rmelnik@wlu.ca (Roderick Melnik), ADNI ( The
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative)
2
disease conditions such as exposure to proinflammatory cytokines or Aβ oligomers and fibrils in astrocyte
cultures from transgenic mice and human AD patient samples [36, 37, 38]. A statistically significant rela-
tionship exists between Aβ, microglia, astrocytes, and overall neural function in a special 3D culture system
[39]. Finding out how astrocyte manipulation affects Aβ deposition and, eventually, neuronal survival and
activity will shed more light on the pathogens of AD. Consequently, the current study has evaluated how
astrocytes affect Aβ growth. Although neurons are frequently believed to be the only source of Aβ in AD,
there is strong evidence that astrocytes also play a role in the growth of Aβ [9, 40]. In particular, when
stimulated by a variety of cellular stimuli, astrocytes upregulate the mechanism required for the production
of Aβ [41, 42].
Note that, two competing models have been proposed to explain the hallmarks of AD: the amyloid
hypothesis (the neuron-centric model) and the Inverse Warburg hypothesis (the neuron-astrocytic model)
[43, 44, 45, 46]. According to the neuron-centric model, a variation in the nuclear genome causes an over-
production of Aβ, which is harmful to neurons. On the other hand, following the neuron-astrocytic model,
the progression of AD is triggered by flaws in the normal energy transduction mechanism, which are caused
by mitochondrial dysregulation. Although certain clinical studies of metabolic interventions have yielded
promising findings for improving cognitive function, clinical trials of disease-modifying therapies have con-
tinuously failed [47, 48]. The inadequately understood nature of AD etiology and progression, as well as
insufficient trial design, are some of the causes of significant trial failure. Mathematical modelling of AD
progression and the development of clinical trial simulations are critical tools for investigating the reasons
why clinical trials fail and improving the clinical trial design. The poorly known nature of AD etiology and
development restricts the ability to construct robust mechanistic models for reliable prediction of disease
progression. There are also semi-mechanistic mathematical models based on inverse problems that have
been developed to reflect changes in cognition over time, as measured by errors on various cognitive tests
used to assess patients’ cognitive abilities, such as the Modified Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)
and the AD Assessment Scale [49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56]. The majority of models created to date in the
above context are stochastic in nature [1, 57]. Such models have the important advantage of allowing for
variation in model parameters and disease biomarkers for predicting disease progression.
Inspired by this fact and using ADNI data, we developed and tested a simple novel stochastic model
to predict the influence of astrocytes on AD progression in a clinical trial. To describe the dynamics of
Aβ growth, we define a stochastic generalization of a logistic growth model. Since AD studies are ob-
servational in nature, with patients’ health assessed at regular visits, the pathology can be described as a
multi-state disease process using the approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) technique. Importantly,
ABC is a data-driven technique that uses many low-cost numerical simulations. ABC also estimates un-
known physical or model parameters, as well as their uncertainties, given reference data from real-world
experiments or higher-fidelity numerical simulations [58]. Using the ABC technique, previous studies have
estimated the probability of varying AD severity stages and examined potential factors that may have an
impact on these probabilities [54, 59]. Therefore, we apply this framework to assess the weak and strong
impacts of astrocytes at various disease progression stages utilizing ADNI data for AD patients per 2-year
visits with respect to their ages. We validated the developed framework using simulated data before ap-
plying it to real longitudinal Aβ growth data from ADNI for AD patients by analyzing the corresponding
inverse problem. Since the inverse problems are frequently ill-posed because the data may not be sufficient
to identify the cause definitively, there may not be an exact solution. What’s more, is that determining
the cause without additional information is frequently very sensitive to noise level and modelling errors.
By representing the unknown as a random variable to emphasize the uncertainty regarding its value, the
Bayesian technique offers a flexible and natural method of introducing additional information to augment
3
the noisy data [60]. On the other hand, Bayesian inference techniques are crucial in inverse problems be-
cause they help us quantify the degree of uncertainty in the solution and provide prior knowledge, which
naturally normalizes the data. To emphasize the uncertainty in their estimation, they treat parameters as
random variables [61, 62]. Therefore, in the present study, the inverse problem can be reformulated as a
problem of Bayesian inference. Moreover, to evaluate the uncertainty quantification of stochastic models,
we employed differential equations in a probabilistic framework using the moment-closure approximation
approach [63]. Using the ABC technique, we were able to fit the ADNI data for Aβ with respect to the ages
of AD patients of our developed models. Our findings revealed that a strong astrocyte effect, where the ini-
tial concentration of Aβ is lower than the concentration of astrocytes, can aid in clearing the growth of Aβ.
Conversely, weak astrocyte effects can contribute to an increase in the production of Aβ. These significant
results could assist researchers in identifying techniques to slow down the progression of AD. Our findings
shed light on the preclinical phases of AD and reveal the astrocyte’s effect on AD progression. Altogether,
these findings support the hypothesis that astrocytes may be essential to developing higher cognitive skills
in the human brain. Thus, changes in astrocyte physiological functions contribute to brain disease. Fur-
thermore, Bayesian formalism supplements the standard inverse problem paradigm for understanding the
pathogenesis of AD.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we describe our model in terms of its different
components: (i) a deterministic growth model of Aβ; (ii) a stochastic modelling approach incorporating the
strong and weak astrocyte effect and (iii) the ABC technique and uncertainty estimates. In Section 3, we
set up the experimental data and model the participant dynamics. We present our results and computational
simulations based on the developed stochastic models in Section 4. The computational results have been
obtained with an in-house developed MATLAB code, and all data analysis has been carried out in Python.
Finally, we discuss our results, conclude our findings, and outline future directions in Sections 5 and 6.
2. Methodology
It has been found that astrocytes, which are abundantly present in the brain, can play a vital role in
slowing down the progression of AD. Studies have suggested that a strong astrocyte effect can help clear the
growth of Aβ while weak astrocyte effects can contribute to an increase in its production [64, 65, 66]. The
present Section highlights the deterministic and statistical modelling approaches incorporating the strong
and weak astrocyte effects on Aβ growth via a model applied within the Bayesian setting. This is achieved
by defining the stochastic growth model of Aβ to account for individual correlated time series using ADNI
data. Additionally, we simulate the growth trajectories of the stochastic model of Aβ using likelihood
estimation. This is followed by the parameter estimation and uncertainty quantification presented in Sub-
section 2.3.
2.1. Deterministic growth model of Aβ incorporating strong and weak astrocyte effects
Fig. 1 gives an overview of our methods. As can be seen, our end goal is to focus on the stochastic
growth model of Aβ because of the inherent stochasticity of monomers growth processes in the regime of
small Aβ peptides numbers [67]. However, the structure of the functional forms of the kinetic equations
describing the deposition of Aβ proteins in the brain can be understood fairly well within a deterministic
framework. Therefore, this step will link us to the historical and most widely implemented mathematical
models of AD in neuroscience. In the present study, we consider the following three deterministic models
(given in Eqs. (1), (3-4)) that describe the kinetic growth of Aβ. The first model is the baseline model of
Aβ growth, in which the growth rate dAβ(t)
dt
is proportional to the number of Aβ, and a single growth rate
4
constant, r, resulting in the standard exponential growth model:
dAβ(t)
dt
= rAβ(t),
(1)
where Aβ(t) = Aβ(0)ert and Aβ(0) is the initial value of Aβ at time t. This model represents the evolution
of Aβ monomers that display individual autonomous proliferation provided by the growth rate constant r
across time and Aβ as shown in Fig. 2 (a) for initial values of Aβ equals [200; 400; 600]mL. We choose
these values for Aβ(0) so that they would be consistent with the ADNI data for AD patients who had
baseline (bl) to 2-year visits (i.e., Aβ(0) = 200mL at baseline, Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL at 12
months, and Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600mL at 24 months are the initial values for the mean of Aβ at
three visits). Moreover, the results are plotted as a function of age in years, assuming that the participants
are all 57 years old at baseline, as seen in Fig. 2 (a). Since AD is a disease that typically affects individuals
over the age of 50, however, It’s also possible that the modelling approach used in the present study could
be applied to larger datasets or to different age groups, which could help to better understand the dynamics
of Aβ accumulation and progression of AD.
Simulated trajectory
ADNI data
Stochastic modelling 
approach
Statistics  (to measure 
moments in time)
Moments approximation
Expected moments 
(in terms of 𝜃 and time)
Negative log-likelihood
Parameter identification 
& uncertainty analysis 
Parameter estimation
Figure 1: (Color online) Schematic representation of the moment closure approximation (MC) technique for stochastic parameter
estimation for the present study. This diagram represents also the structure for the MC technique to obtain moments of a stochastic
process and demonstrate how model expected moments are fitted to stochastic data (motivated by [68]).
Initially, AD targets neurons and their connections in brain regions associated with memory, such as the
entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. Subsequently, it progresses to affect other areas in the cerebral cortex
responsible for functions such as language, reasoning, and social behaviour [69]. Notably, the logistic
growth model has been used to model the growth of Aβ concentration (mL) over time [10, 70]. Aβ is
initially generated in a limited number of affected brain regions and, over the course of the disease, can
propagate to other regions of the brain. Thus, in the classical formulation of the logistic growth model for
Aβ, the growth rate is characterized by a growth rate constant (r) modulated by an additional term for the
temporal evolution to describe the slowing of the growth rate as the population approaches carrying capacity
(g):
dAβ(t)
dt
= r(1 −Aβ(t)
g
)Aβ(t).
(2)
Importantly, in the present study, we are considering the temporal evolution of the growth of Aβ. The
logistic growth models that describe two temporal regimes of brain involvement in affected areas during
5
AD: when Aβ << g, the Aβ
g is negligible and the Aβ plaques essentially exhibit exponential growth, and
when Aβ is near g, the net growth rate dAβ
dt slows towards zero, as Aβ approaches g and the term (1 −Aβ
g )
approaches zero.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: (Color online) The dynamic curves for deterministic models for Aβ0 = 200mL (blue), 400mL (green), 600mL (red)
(a-c). Here: (a) is the behaviour of Aβ growth model (Eq. 1), (b) is the strong astrocyte effect on Aβ growth model (Eq. 3), and
(c) is the weak astrocyte effect on Aβ growth model (Eq. 4).
Moreover, when astroglia is not overactivated in the early stages of AD, they destroy the soluble form
of Aβ through apolipoproteins, ApoE2 [71]. But if astroglia is moderately activated, they protect neurons
and produce a drop in the growth of Aβ [72]. However, as AD progresses, astrocytes feed on themselves,
resulting in the overactivation of astroglia. Furthermore, astrocytes are said to boost Aβ deposition by
overexpressing β-secretase BACE1, which cleaves the APP alongside γ-secretase [26]. Astrocytes are
usually triggered by extracellular TNF-α, but they are also stimulated by Aβ [73]. Indeed, the precise
involvement of astrocytes in Aβ clearance and/or deposition is still unknown [74, 75]. Research has shown
that astrocytes can have both strong and weak effects on the growth of Aβ, depending on the specific type
of astrocyte [64, 65, 66]. Strong astrocytes refer to astrocytes that have a more activated state and are more
responsive to changes in their environment. These astrocytes have been shown to have a protective effect
on neurons and can help to reduce the growth of Aβ. Strong astrocytes can do this by releasing factors that
promote the clearance of Aβ, such as apolipoprotein E, or by secreting factors that promote the growth of
new neurons, which can help to offset the damage caused by Aβ. On the other hand, weak astrocytes refer
to astrocytes that are less activated and less responsive to changes in their environment. These astrocytes
have been shown to have a weaker protective effect on neurons and can actually promote the growth of
Aβ. Weak astrocytes can do this by releasing factors that promote the aggregation of Aβ or by failing to
clear Aβ from the brain. As a result, we provide the logistic growth model to highlight the strong influence
of astrocytes, which is similar to the logistic growth model except that the reliance on Aβ happens in the
opposite regime in this model [64, 65, 66, 76, 77]. We introduced here the term of astrocyte effect in the
form of 1 −Aastro
Aβ
that lowers the observed growth rate at small Aβ near the threshold Aastro as:
dAβ(t)
dt
= r(1 −Aastro
Aβ(t) )Aβ(t).
(3)
If the concentration of Aβ is lower than the concentration of astrocytes, then astrocytes can have a strong
effect on Aβ metabolism and clearance. Therefore, we choose Aastro = 700mL which results in the
clearance of Aβ as shown in Fig. 2 (c). As expected, initial conditions lower than the concentration of
Aastro = 700mL (corresponding to Aβ0 = 200, Aβ0 = 400 and Aβ0 = 600) result in a slowing down of
Aβ net growth rate. However, it is important to note that this clearance rate may change over time due to
6
various factors that can influence the system. The value of Aastro is chosen based on the ideas highlighted
in [64, 72, 78]. Moreover, the fact that a decrease in the concentration of astrocytes i.e., AD may start
to propagate once we decrease the Aastro would lead to an increase in the concentration of Aβ [79, 80].
This model is able to explain the threshold-like behaviour of astrocytes observed in preclinical studies of
the progression of AD in mice [78, 81, 82], where below a threshold number of affected brain areas, AD
never forms. Finally, in order to incorporate weak astrocyte effects, where we consider the growth rate to
be always greater than zero for the initial value of Aβ, we introduce an additional model. We call it the
extended astrocyte deterministic model (i.e., the weak astrocyte effect model), and it is given as follows
[42, 77, 83]:
dAβ(t)
dt
= r(1 −Aastro + γ
Aβ(t) + γ )Aβ(t),
(4)
where γ presents the clearance rate adopted from [84]. This model is similar to the strong astrocyte effect
model (Eq. 3), but it includes a new parameter γ that allows the model to show down a strong astrocyte
impact when Aastro > Aβ. However, for weak astrocyte conditions, the term Aastro remains less than
Aβ, maintaining a net growth rate as Aβ increases. The behaviour of the extended astrocyte model with
lower concentrations of Aastro that result in a weak astrocyte effect is shown in Fig. 2 (c). Potentially
weak astrocyte effects, such as seen during a metabolism reaction, are explained by the weak astrocyte
deterministic model [36]. The three aforementioned growth models based on Eq. (1) and Eqs. (3-4) have
been used for obtaining the results presented in Fig. 2. The parameter r = 0.0227, is the same for all Eqs.
(1, 3-4) (adopted from [84]), however, for Eq. (3), Aastro = 700mL and for Eq. (4), Aastro = 100mL. The
values of Aastro are chosen based on the facts that a reduction in the concentration of astrocytes (i.e., in
AD) may trigger the spread of the disease suggesting that a decrease in Aastro could lead to an increase in
the concentration of Aβ [10, 72, 78]. It is well known that, a logistic growth model, in which the carrying
capacity of Aβ varies across the brain but the exponential growth rate and duration of half the maximum
Aβ concentration are constant, can be used to mathematically simulate the in vivo temporal evolution of
Aβ in AD [9, 85, 86].
2.2. The stochastic modelling approach
Here, we make the assumption that the Aβ growth kinetics are observed in a subset of the affected
areas of the brain, where neural activity is expected to vary largely in response to “birth” and “death”
events, which together define the net growth rate, dAβ
dt . This situation results in apparent growth kinetics
of Aβ, which differ markedly from the typical behaviour described in Section 2.1. Here, the birth rate is
referred to as “aggregation” and the death rate as “fragmentation”. This development follows the ideas
of [84]. A simple model (i.e., Eq. (1)) for the formation of monomers includes linear aggregation (ra),
which represents the specific scenario in which monomers are added to an aggregate, and fragmentation
(rf), which represents the specific scenario in which monomers are created [84]. A stochastic modelling
framework was used to evaluate the applicability of the aforementioned astrocyte effect models (i.e Eqs.
(3-4)). We selected the formulations for our stochastic models in this framework to recapitulate a first-order
moment (mean) that matched the equivalent deterministic ODE of the Aβ growth model and strong and
weak astrocyte effect on Aβ growth presented in Eqs. (1, 3-4). Thus, fragmentation and aggregation rates
were chosen based on plausible predictions that were consistent with the astrocyte effect model behaviour.
The majority of the models developed so far for AD progression have a stochastic aspect [54, 87, 88].
Such models allow for variation in the model’s parameters and stochastic factors in the development of
AD pathology. In the context of the stochastic model, x(t) refers to the random variable that represents
the concentration of Aβ at time t. This random variable takes on different values in different trials of the
7
experiment due to the inherent randomness in the system. The expected value of x(t), denoted as ⟨x(t)⟩,
represents the average concentration of Aβ that we expect to observe at time t if we repeated the experiment
many times.
The goal of the stochastic model is to capture the randomness in the system and predict the probability
distribution of x(t) at different times. In developing such a model in our context, we follow the ideas of
[68]. The expected mean number for Aβ concentration in time ⟨x(t)⟩is identical to what the deterministic
models anticipate, which means that the average value of x(t) predicted by the stochastic model is the same
as the solution of the deterministic models given by Eqs. (1, 3-4). Therefore, for the stochastic models, the
time evolution of x(t) in a simple way is defined as:
• Event 1: aggregation C + C →2C (reaction rate: ra(x))
• Event 2: fragmentation 2C →C + C (reaction rate: rf(x)),
where C denotes monomers [84], ra(x) and rf(x) describe the rates at which the corresponding event
occurs. Given a stochastic process with a set of possible events i, generally, the probability of event i taking
place during an infinitesimal time interval ∆t can be expressed as the multiplication of the event rate, the
population state, and the duration of the time interval given as [68]:
Pevent = revent(x)x∆t.
(5)
The chance of an event occurring is always a function of x since it is a first-order reaction, and we restrict the
potential events to aggregation or fragmentation events [84]. The aggregation rate (ra) and fragmentation
rate (rf) in the basic aggregation-fragmentation model are independent of x (i.e., ra = rf = r). For
instance, for a simple growth model (i.e Eq. 1),
pa = rx∆t, pf = rx∆t.
(6)
The above model’s typical behaviour matches the exponential growth model. However, we incorporate
aggregation and/or fragmentation rates that are functions of x for the remaining stochastic model. In the
stochastic model that we consider, the aggregation and/or fragmentation rates are not assumed to be constant
but rather depend on the size of the monomer or aggregate. Specifically, we incorporate aggregation and/or
fragmentation rates that are functions of x, denoted as ra(x) and ra(x), respectively. These rates capture
the fact that the probability of aggregation or fragmentation occurring at a given time depends on the size
of the monomer or aggregate and the likelihood of interactions between them [89]. The first stochastic
astrocyte model we consider is the strong astrocyte effect model (sM1), presented in Table 1. In this
model, we assume that for x approaching the threshold value Aastro, the astrocyte effect has an equal effect
on reducing birth probabilities (pa) and increasing death probabilities (pf), leading to:
pa = (ra −Aastro
x
(ra −rf)
2
)x∆t, pf = (rf + Aastro
x
(ra −rf)
2
)x∆t.
(7)
The weak astrocyte effect model (sM2) presented in Table 1 may be demonstrated using the same justifi-
cations as the strong astrocyte effect model, resulting in the following birth and death probabilities:
pa = (ra −Aastro + γ
x + γ
(ra −rf)
2
)x∆t, pf = (rf + Aastro + γ
x + γ
(ra −rf)
2
)x∆t,
(8)
where γ is the clearance rate adopted from [84]. The models presented in Table 1 are stochastic models
and we treat them as an inverse problem. Each of these models has a set of parameters that determine
8
Table 1: Families of stochastic growth models whose typical behaviour is consistent with deterministic growth models (presented
in Section 2.1). For the astrocyte model families, the astrocyte effect can alter the probability of aggregation (birth), fragmentation
(death), or both, corresponding to various structural interpretations.
Growth model (sM1)
Strong astrocyte effect model (sM2)
Weak astrocyte effect model (sM3)
The mean of Aβ concentration change is given as a deterministic ODE for each of the stochastic models
dAβ(t)
dt
= rAβ(t)
dAβ(t)
dt
= r(1 −Aastro
Aβ(t) )Aβ(t)
dAβ(t)
dt
= r(1 −Aastro+γ
Aβ(t)+γ )Aβ(t)
Event probabilities to describe each stochastic model
on birth & death
on birth & death
on birth & death
Pa = (rAβ)∆t
pa =
 raAβ −Aastro(
ra−rf
2
)

∆t
pa =
 raAβ −Aβ(
ra−rf
2
)( Aastro+γ
Aβ+γ
)

∆t
Pf = (rAβ)∆t
pf =
 rfAβ + Aastro(
ra−rf
2
)

∆t
pf =
 rfAβ + Aβ(
ra−rf
2
)( Aastro+γ
Aβ+γ
)

∆t
the probability of observing a certain event during a time interval. In Table 1, each of the three stochastic
models with their probabilities mentioned above i.e., Eqs. (6-8) are described, along with the assumptions
made on the mechanism of aggregation or fragmentation rates. We simulate the growth trajectories of the
stochastic models using the maximum likelihood method, which involves generating multiple realizations
of the corresponding stochastic process and estimating the parameters that best fit the observed data. The
stochastic processes referred to in this context are the aggregation and fragmentation events of Aβ. These
events are modelled as random events that occur over time and result in changes in the concentration of
Aβ. Specifically, we start with an initial condition for the concentration of Aβ, represented by the random
variable x0, and simulate the stochastic process by generating a sequence of random events that correspond
to the aggregation and fragmentation events of Aβ. We repeat this process multiple times to generate a set
of simulated growth trajectories, which are then compared to the observed data to estimate the parameters
of the stochastic model. The maximum likelihood method allows us to estimate the most likely values
of the model parameters based on the observed data, and to quantify the uncertainty in those estimates.
This approach provides a way to assess the goodness of fit of the stochastic model to the data and to make
predictions about the future behaviour of the system. The models indicated above are used to assess the
significance of the astrocyte effect on the growth of the Aβ concentration in the brain during AD. In the
stochastic exponential growth model, i.e., sM1 (see Table 1), the growth rate, which is determined as the
sum of the birth and death rates, is assumed to be constant and independent of the initial conditions. We
examined the average behaviours of the candidate models in their deterministic forms, which allowed us
to develop corresponding stochastic models that produce the same average behaviour. The stochastic mod-
els are shown in Table 1, and they were developed based on the deterministic models in order to capture
the inherent variability and randomness observed in the present study. In the context of stochastic mod-
els, a moment-closure approximation can be used to derive approximate likelihood functions for Bayesian
inference [63]. Therefore, in the next Section 2.3, applying the moment-closure approximation approach
for parameter estimation (Fig. 1) using stochastic models (i.e., sM1 −sM3) to the high-throughput Aβ
growth data from the ADNI database for AD patients allows us to evaluate the applicability of the suggested
stochastic models. By computationally generating growth trajectories using a model of intermediate com-
plexity, we first verified our approach. Its ability to correctly identify the underlying model and the true
parameters was demonstrated by applying the statistical inference framework and parameter estimation to
the generated data, as can be seen next (Section 2.3).
2.3. Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) technique and uncertainty estimates
First, we note that the ABC methodology is used here to estimate the parameters of stochastic models
(sM1 −sM3) and quantify their uncertainty [90]. The ABC approach involves simulating synthetic data
9
from the model using a set of candidate parameter values, and then comparing these simulated data to the
observed data to determine the parameter values that are most consistent with the observed data. Addition-
ally, moment closure and Bayesian techniques can be combined to estimate the parameters of a stochastic
model and quantify their uncertainty [91]. We use the moment-closure approximation approach presented
in Fr¨ohlich and colleagues’ work to fit the developed stochastic growth models (i.e., sM1 −sM3) to ex-
perimentally measured growth curves of Aβ from the ADNI database, making inference on the stochastic
process possible [63]. Here we use the master equation (ME) to define the change in the distribution of
probability that the system has (i.e., in this case, x) as a function of time. We can derive the expected values
of x1, x2, . . . , xm (with m being the number of observations), and the time derivatives of moments through
ME. We developed stochastic models in this context so that the differential of the first-order moment corre-
lates to one of the deterministic models presented in Eqs. (1,3-4). The discrete-time version of the ME, also
known as the Kolmogorov forward equation or the Chapman-Kolmogorov equation, defines the probability
of x at time t as a sum of the probabilities of aggregation and fragmentation, the concentration of Aβ can
only change by 1 unit at a time in this model because we assume that the system can only transition between
adjacent states [92]. This means that if the system is currently in state x, it can only transition to state x −1
(decrease by 1), state x (remain the same), or state x + 1 (increase by 1) at the next time step. This assump-
tion of only allowing transitions between adjacent states is based on the idea that the system is subject to
some kind of physical or biological constraint that prevents it from making large jumps in concentration.
For example, in a biological system, the production and degradation of Aβ may be regulated by enzymes
and other molecular processes that operate at a certain rate, which limits the rate at which the concentration
can change. By carefully modelling the system in this way, the discrete-time Chapman-Kolmogorov equa-
tion allows us to study the dynamics of the system and make predictions about how it will evolve over time,
even in the presence of randomness or uncertainty. It is given as follows:
P(x, t + ∆t) = P(x −1, t) · pf · ∆t + P(x, t) · [1 −(pa + pf) · ∆t] + P(x + 1, t) · pa · ∆t.
(9)
Here, P(x, t) represents the probability density function of the concentration of Aβ at time t, with x repre-
senting the possible values of the concentration. The three terms on the right-hand side of the equation (9)
represent the rates of change in the probability density function due to the occurrence of different events.
This master equation is a key tool for analyzing the behaviour of stochastic models and can be used to
compute various statistical properties of the system, such as the mean and variance of the concentration of
Aβ(t) over time. We hope to be able to estimate the mean and variance of x over time using experimental
data with adequate repetitions. We want to use ME to derive the first and second moments to directly com-
pare the mean and variance in the ADNI data to the expected mean and variance of each stochastic model
(adopted from [68]). We followed the procedure outlined in [93]. The mean and variance of each model
can be expressed in terms of the first and second-order moments, denoted by ⟨x⟩and ⟨x⟩2, given as:
⟨x⟩(t + ∆t) =
∞
X
x=0
xP(x, t + ∆t), ⟨x2⟩(t + ∆t) =
∞
X
x=0
x2P(x, t + ∆t).
(10)
Here, the notation ⟨. . .⟩indicates the expectation value of the moment for each stochastic model (sM1−
sM3) as presented in Table 2. The stochastic models have the same mean ODE corresponding to their
deterministic model family (exponential, strong astrocyte effect, and weak astrocyte effect models; Eqs.
(1), (3-4)), but they differ in variance depending on whether the astrocyte effect changes the aggregation,
fragmentation, or both event terms. To obtain the mean and variance of each stochastic model, it is necessary
to compute the first and second moments of the probability distribution function. This can be done by
using the ME of each model and following a procedure outlined in [68]. The estimated mean and variance
10
Table 2: Using moment approach (motivated by [68]): Differential equations of the moment-closure approximations of the mean
and variance computed from the ME for each stochastic model i.e., Eqs (6-8) (sM1 −sM3).
Model
Mean
Variance
sM1
dµi
dt = µi(ra −rf)
dσi
dt = 2σi(ra −rf) + µi(ra + rf)
sM2
dµi
dt = µi(ra −rf)
 1 −Aastro
µi

dσi
dt
= 2σi(ra −rf) −2µi(ra −rf)Aastro + (ra + rf)µi −2µi(ra −
rf)(µi −Aastro)
sM3
dµi
dt = µi(ra −rf)
 1 −Aastro+γ
µi+γ

dσi
dt = 2σi(ra−rf)+µi(ra+rf)−2σi(ra−rf)
  Aastro+γ
µi+γ

−2µi(ra−
rf)
 1 −Aastro+γ
µi+γ

of the model were obtained by fitting the stochastic model to experimental or simulated data. Then, we
estimated the model parameters using a maximum likelihood estimation. Once the model parameters were
estimated, the mean and variance of the stochastic model were calculated using the equations for the mean
and variance in terms of moments as given in Table 2. To validate the model, the simulated data set of
10, 000 trajectories was generated using the same model parameters, initial conditions, and time points as
simulated data used to estimate the model parameters such as ra, rf and Aastro. The mean and variance of
the 10, 000 trajectories were then calculated and compared to the estimated mean and estimated variance
of the model. We found that the mean and variance of the simulated data set of 10, 000 trajectories with
known parameters matched the estimated mean and variance of the model. The unknown parameters (i.e.
denoted as θ) for each stochastic model (sM1 −sM3), developed in the present study are ra, rf and
Aastro, where for simplicity we set γ as a known parameter. To solve the differential equations (i.e., Eqs.
6-8) using Bayesian inference, we need to first specify the prior distributions for the unknown parameters
(i.e., ra, rf, and Aastro), and then use Bayesian methods to update these priors based on the observed data.
Let’s initially assume that the priors for all the parameters are independent and normal. This fairly non-
informative prior allows for a wide range of possible values for the parameters. Next, to find the parameters
of the developed stochastic models, the maximum likelihood estimation approach has been used [63]. The
likelihood function implicitly assumes that the measured mean and variance of the data at each time point tn
are normally distributed around the mean (µi(tn, θ)) predicted by the model and variance (σi(tn, θ)) with
the estimated mean and variance given by ˆµi(tn, θ) and ˆσi(tn, θ). Moreover, the standard deviations for
each distribution of mean and variance are functions of unknown parameter θ and are given by Zµi(θ) and
Zσi(θ). The methods used to develop this model were proposed by Fr¨ohlich and colleagues respectively
[63]. Therefore, the likelihood function is given as follows [68]:
L(θ) =
n
Y
i=1
1
q
2πZ2µi(θ)
exp

−1
2
µi(tn, θ) −ˆµi(tn, θ)
Zµi(θ)
2
×
n
Y
i=1
1
q
2πZ2σi(θ)
exp

−1
2
σi(tn, θ) −ˆσi(tn, θ)
Zσi(θ)
2
,
(11)
where n is the number of observations and the negative log-likelihood function is given accordingly as [68]:
NLL(θ) = 1
2
n
Y
i=1

log 2πZ2
µi(θ)+
µi(tn, θ) −ˆµi(tn, θ)
Zµi(θ)
2
+1
2
n
Y
i=1

log 2πZ2
σi(θ)+
σi(tn, θ) −ˆσi(tn, θ)
Zσi(θ)
2
.
(12)
To measure overall time points, the above equations weigh equally to find the mean and variance of the data
using the maximum likelihood parameter estimation method. We used the fminsearch function in MATLAB
11
to find NLL(θ). In practice, Bayesian inference for the Aβ model may require careful consideration of
the choice of prior distributions and the appropriate likelihood function, as well as the use of appropriate
computational methods for sampling from the posterior distributions. As a result, in this scenario, we may
need to go to the next phase of the sensitivity analysis and examine the posterior density plots. Note that
the posterior distributions for forecasting Aβ dynamics change when alternative priors are specified. The
posterior distribution of the intercept and residual variance of Aβ will vary based on the supplied priors,
indicating a substantively evolving interpretation of the intercept depending on the priors. The systematic
sensitivity analysis represents one of the areas for future studies.
3. Analysis based on the experimental setup supported by ADNI data
3.1. ADNI data
The datasets used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neu-
roimaging Initiative (ADNI) database adni.loni.usc.edu. The primary goal of the ADNI has been to
test whether serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), other biolog-
ical markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression
of AD. Specifically, we used the ADNI data prepared for the AD modelling challenge and incorporate the
weak and strong effect of astrocytes into the deterministic and stochastic growth models of Aβ, and fitted
the model for the progression of AD. Details on this are provided next.
3.2. Modelling dynamics of participants
We use the quantitative template (available at (https://adni.loni.usc.edu/) as a CSV file)
for the progression of the AD project data set, which includes the three ADNI phases: ADNI 1, ADNI
GO, and ADNI 2. This dataset contains measurements from brain MRI, PET, Cerebrospinal Fluid Analy-
sis (CSF), cognitive tests, demographics, and genetic information [87, 94]. From ADNI 1/GO/2, we used
the data for 1706 individuals with 6880 visits. The details of patients’ visits are provided in the tem-
plate. The ADNI Conversion Committee made clinical diagnoses of MCI (mild cognitive impairment),
NL (normal), EMCI (early mild cognitive impairment), LMCI(late mild cognitive impairment), and AD
based on the standards outlined in the ADNI protocol [87, 95]. Following the ideas of [87, 94], we de-
signed the data for the individuals with clinical follow-up visits to fall within the baseline to 24-month
window. Moreover, clinical follow-up visits with improperly arranged dates are discarded for each indi-
vidual. Also, based on the data statistics, an acceptable time gap of 12 months is estimated for the present
study. In the data set, measurements and clinical diagnoses with missing dates and information per visit
are set to missing values in order to use the ABC method, and participants with fewer than two distinct
visits are excluded. Notably, data sets containing missing values and clinical status are denoted as ”miss-
ing”. For the present study, we have used only the AD patients’ data (although there are also NL, EMCI,
LMCI, and MCI data sets). We found that the participants with AD brains for each visit between 2 years
have different Aβ concentrations as provided in the ADNI data set. Aβ is a promising biomarker that is
measured in CSF fluids collected from ADNI participants measured in mL. In our study, we investigated
the concentrations of Aβ in AD patients across a range of ages spanning from 50 to 90 years. Our anal-
ysis revealed that AD progression is more pronounced as age increases. Furthermore, we observed that
a weak influence of astrocytes can actually promote the growth of Aβ. These findings provide valuable
insights into the complex relationship between age, astrocytes, and the development of AD, which could
aid in the development of effective treatment strategies. In our research, we used the mean values of Aβ
concentrations measured at bl, 12 months, and 24 months as the initial values of Aβ, which were set to
12
Aβbl(57) = 200mL, Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL, Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600mL. It’s important
to note that the initial values of Aβ were calculated as the average of the measurements taken at those three
time points. However, in presenting the results, we reported the Aβ concentration values in relation to the
patient’s age, which was measured in years. This allowed us to more accurately assess the relationship
between Aβ concentration and age over the course of the study period. Interestingly, as the patient’s age
increases, there is a rapid growth in Aβ concentrations during the disease state which leads to the progres-
sion of AD. However, the influence of astrocytes behaves differently on the growth of Aβ. We are focusing
on the evolution of Aβ because there are many plaques composed of Aβ in the AD patient’s brain [96, 94].
Importantly, inverse problems refer to the process of determining the input parameters or conditions
that are responsible for producing a measured output [97]. To clarify, the stochastic growth models of
Aβ were used to generate synthetic data, which we then used as inputs to our inverse problems (sM1 −
sM3). In our case, we used Bayesian inference to determine the unknown input parameters that were
responsible for generating the observed Aβ concentration data. The measured output in our analysis was
the Aβ concentration data obtained from ADNI. The input we tried to cover were the parameters of the
stochastic growth models of Aβ, which were used to generate synthetic Aβ concentration data (i.e., ra,rf
and Aastro. For our analysis, using Bayesian inference, we feed the Aβ concentrations data from ADNI
to our models (sM1 −sM3). We estimate the parameters accordingly using the maximum likelihood
estimation as discussed in Section 2.3. The three different proposed stochastic models explain significant
changes in the dynamic behaviour of Aβ. First, we look at whether Aβ development in vitro is guided
by fitting the simulated and ADNI data to the exponential growth model (sM1), which is often used to
describe AD progression well below carrying capacity [10]. Then, we investigate the strong and weak
astrocyte effects by fitting the simulated and ADNI data into the developed models (i.e., sM2 −sM3).
Details are given in the next Section.
4. Results
The temporal probabilistic distribution of Aβ provides valuable information for studying the progres-
sion of AD and developing effective treatments through the ADNI database. In this section, we will present
the results obtained from the developed stochastic models presented in Section 2.2. In AD, the accumula-
tion of Aβ plaques is known to be a key pathological feature of the disease. The spatial distribution of these
plaques throughout the brain is known to be heterogeneous, with some regions being more affected than
others. Additionally, the temporal progression of the accumulation of Aβ plaques can also vary, with some
patients showing a more rapid progression of the disease than others. The ADNI database contains data
on patients with varying degrees of AD, and as a result, the Aβ accumulation patterns may differ across
different patients. Moreover, the temporal aspect of Aβ accumulation in AD refers to the progression of the
disease over time, as the accumulation of Aβ and the formation of plaques gradually spread throughout the
brain, and this progression can vary among individuals. Our models produce the temporal evolution of Aβ
using simulated data and the ADNI data.
The first goal is to plot the predicted results by fitting the simulated data before adding the ADNI
data. Therefore, to fit and generate trajectories of the simulated data that resembled the ADNI data, we
incorporated a random noise term. For instance, a random noise term was added to the growth model of
Aβ (i.e., sM1 presented in Table 1) and the simulated trajectories of this model are presented in Fig. 3
(a) with initial values of Aβ (i.e., [200; 400; 600]). The initial values of Aβ were taken at the time points
corresponding to the baseline, 12-month, and 24-month visits to align the simulated data with the ADNI
data. The time vector span is defined as linspace(0, 30, 100), which means that the ODE is solved for 100
time points between t = bl months and t = 24 months (i.e., a 3-year period). Moreover, random noise
13
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: (Color online) (a) The trajectories of Aβ growth model (i.e., sM1 given in Table 1) with simulated data output from
10, 000 simulations with random noise, (b) The trajectories of Aβ growth model with fitted ADNI data, the three curves show
the fitted Aβ data at bl (blue), 12 months (red) and 24 months (yellow) with respect to age. Aβ is a promising biomarker that is
measured in (mL) in ADNI fluids such as in CSF [87].
with a standard deviation of 50 is added to the simulated trajectories to account for variability in the data
as shown in Fig. 3 (a). The results are plotted as a function of age in years, assuming that the participants
are all 57 years old at baseline in Fig. 3 (a). The simulated data and fitted ADNI data can be connected
by using the ABC technique to fit a model to the simulated data, and then generating predictions such as
the temporal trajectories for ADNI data based on that model. Next, the ADNI data have been fitted to
the growth model of Aβ (i.e., sM1) presented in Table 1). In addition, to get a temporal distribution of
Aβ growth and to plot the temporal trajectories at each initial condition, we fitted the ADNI data using
the ABC method independently as shown in Fig. 3 (b). At first, the stochastic trajectories of Aβ were
sampled at bl −24 month for the stochastic model (i.e., sM1 presented in Table 1), corresponding to the
ages utilized in the experimental measurements of Aβ. The average Aβ trajectories for the fitted ADNI data
are depicted in Fig. 3 (b) with the initial conditions Aβbl(57) = 200mL; Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL,
Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600mL for AD patients. Note that the initial concentrations are calculated (based
on the data given on the template) as the mean of Aβ at the baseline visit (i.e., Aβbl(57) = 200mL), the
mean of Aβ at the 12 month visit (i.e., Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL), and the mean of Aβ at the
24 month-visit (i.e., Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600) and the results are plotted for Aβ against the age of
patients. The time used for the simulation and plotting of results spans 30 years, with time points spaced
evenly over this interval. Moreover, in Fig. 3 (b), the blue curve shows the fitted Aβ data at baseline visits,
the red curve shows the fitted Aβ data at 12 months visits and yellows shows the fitted Aβ data at 24 months
visits with respect to the ages of the AD patients.
The patterns observed in the fitted ADNI data for Aβ concentration are the same as observed in the
growth of Aβ concentration presented in Fig. 2 (a) without the influence of astrocytes. Hence our idea
of developing the deterministic models before stochastic models were helpful. The disease progression of
Alzheimer’s is often associated with an increase in the concentration of Aβ in the brain. This is particularly
evident as patients age, with rapid growth in Aβ concentrations observed over time. In Fig.3 (b), we can
clearly see this trend, where the Aβ concentrations measured during the three visits are higher as patients
get old. This suggests that the disease continues to progress, leading to an accumulation of Aβ in the brain
14
as the patient gets older. For instance, at the baseline visits ( blue curve), we see that in the patients whose
age ranged from 50 −90, there is an increase in the concentration of Aβ as they get older. Hence, as age
increases, the disease progresses more in AD patients.
Figure 4: (Color online) The temporal distribution of Aβ growth and the mean and variance of fitted ADNI data for AD patients.
The three curves show the fitted Aβ data from 3 visits at bl, 12 months and 24 months with respect to the age of the simple Aβ
growth model (sM1 presented in Table 1 and the corresponding mean and variance presented in Table 2) using the ABC technique.
We plot the results in Fig. 4, using a standard deviation of ±2 mean, knowing that in any distribution,
about 95% of values will be within 2 standard deviations of the mean. Still, we observed a notable shift in
the measured data around the age of 82 years. This shift may indicate a potential bias or uneven distribution
specifically centred around that age, resulting in a distinct kink in the plotted data. It is possible that there
are fewer data points or a specific subset of data points available around that age, leading to a noticeable
deviation. However, despite this anomaly, the model demonstrates its capability to explain a substantial
portion of the observed variability in the data. To plot the mean and variance of fitted data, we first need to
fit a curve to the data. Fig. 4 shows the curve for the mean and variance of the fitted ADNI data for the simple
Aβ growth model (sM1). It can be seen clearly that the data fit well according to the mean and variance. In
Fig. 4, we can see that the mean of the fitted data follows the trend of the ADNI data reasonably well, with
both showing a gradual increase in Aβ concentration with age. Additionally, we can see that the variance of
the fitted data is also consistent with the ADNI data, with both showing an increasing trend with age. This
provides a good fit which means that the fitted curve is able to capture the general trend in the data, as well
as the variability around the trend. In other words, the model is able to explain a significant portion of the
observed variability in the data. This is an important finding as it suggests that the sM1 model provides a
good representation of the underlying biological process that governs the accumulation of Aβ in the brain
over time. The results suggest that the occurrence of Aβ deposits in AD patients is a dynamic process with
significant growth. When Aβ deposits are created in the brain, they can become more stable and resistant to
degradation. This is due to fibrillogenesis, where individual Aβ peptides aggregate and form stable fibrils
[98]. The formation of these fibrils is thought to be a key step in the development of Aβ plaques, which are
the hallmark of AD. Our results are consistent with other studies demonstrating a significant increase in Aβ
deposition throughout the preclinical stages of AD [99, 100, 101, 94]. This information on the growth of
15
Aβ concentration may be useful in designing potential AD treatment strategies [102, 103].
The experimental growth measurements at low initial Aβ concentrations reflect the variety in observed
Aβ trajectories for a single initial condition [85]. Importantly, given the inherent stochasticity of the frag-
mentation and aggregation processes, which is evident at low initial values of Aβ examined in this study,
our variation in Aβ growth dynamics is to be anticipated (Fig. 4). Because stochasticity is more visible and
may be detected experimentally at low Aβ concentrations (Fig. 4), such dynamics are best represented by
a stochastic rather than a deterministic process. Therefore, the study concludes that the simple Aβ growth
model (sM1) is a suitable model for predicting Aβ trajectories in the context of AD. Further, to see if the
preliminary observations of growth-rate scaling with initial Aβ could be explained by alternative growth
models that account for the astrocyte effect (sM2 −sM3), the experimental data of ADNI growth trajec-
tories for Aβ were calibrated to the stochastic models using the stochastic modelling framework shown in
Fig. 1 as follows.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: (Color online) The (a) histograms with respect to trajectories of simulated stochastic Aβ concentrations (mL) and (b)
the trajectories with simulated data of strong astrocyte effect model (sM2 presented in Table 1), output from 10, 000 simula-
tions with Aβbl(57) = 200mL, Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL, Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600mL, ra = 0.002413, rf =
0.0006536, Aastro = 700mL from 3 visits at bl (blue), 12-months (green) and 24-months (red), with respect to age. The simulated
mean (black line) and expected mean (black circle) present the best-fit mean at Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL.
Next, before fitting the ADNI data to the strong and weak astrocyte effect model, we fitted the simulated
data first. The results shown in Fig. 5 (a-b), present the effects of adding random white noise to the strong
astrocyte effect model (sM2 presented in Table 1). In Fig. 5 (a), the histograms are plotted using Eq. 9
which shows the distribution of simulated stochastic Aβ concentrations corresponding to patients with ages
57 −87 [85, 87, 95]. The x-axis represents the range of values of the Aβ concentrations being measured,
and it is divided into a set of intervals or bins with respect to the initial conditions from 3 visits. The y-
axis represents the frequency of observations falling within each bin. In the context of the simulation of
stochastic Aβ concentrations, the histogram shows the distribution of the concentrations that were simulated
over 10, 000 trials, with starting concentrations of Aβ i.e., 200mL, 400mL, 600mL. We can see that Aβ
concentrations are normally distributed as depicted in Fig. 5 (a), therefore the simulated data fit well to the
chosen model. Moreover, the simulated stochastic Aβ trajectories for Aβ from 3 visits are presented in Fig.
5 (b) demonstrating the predictable decline in growth dynamics of Aβ that is visible at low initial levels of
Aβ since Aastro = 700mL is greater than the initial values of Aβ. Moreover, we sample time evenly from
the stochastic simulated Aβ trajectories and determine the simulated mean and expected mean of Aβ at each
16
time point for Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL at 12 month visit as seen in Fig. 5 (b) with respect to age.
The simulated data fit well as per the expected mean and simulated mean, according to the strong astrocyte
effect model (sM1) on birth and death using the ABC technique of statistical approaches. As seen from Fig.
5 (b), the chosen model correctly predicted the simulated mean and expected mean of the simulated data.
For instance, at Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL at 12 month visit as seen in Fig. 5 (b) (black curve) the
simulated mean and expected mean are similar or have little difference, thus it suggests that the model fits
well with the simulated data. For the strong astrocyte effect model (sM2) given in Table 1 with mean given
in Table 2, if the concentration of astrocytes (Aastro) is greater than the initial concentration of Aβ, there is
a decrease in the concentration of Aβ as shown in Fig. 5 (b). This suggests that the strong astrocyte effect
facilitates the clearance of Aβ. Note that the trajectories of the simulated stochastic Aβ concentrations do
not start exactly from the deterministic initial concentrations of Aβ due to the inherent nature of stochastic
simulations and the random processes involved.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: (Color online) (a) The trajectories of weak astrocyte effect model (sM3 presented in Table 1) with simulated data,
output from 10, 000 simulations with ra = 0.002413, rf = 0.0006536, Aastro = 100mL from 3 visits at bl (blue), 12 months
(green) and 24 months (red). The simulated mean (black line) and expected mean (black circle) present the best-fit mean at
Aβ12−month−visits(57) = 400mL and (b) the histograms of simulated stochastic Aβ concentrations data (mL) and normal fit (red
line) are presented at 24 month visits with Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600mL.
Similarly, Fig. 6 (a-b) shows the results of adding random white noise to the weak astrocyte effect
model (sM3 presented in Table 1) of Aβ. The simulated Aβ trajectories from three visits with respect to
age are shown in Fig. 6 (a). The model successfully fits the data well under initial conditions and throughout
the whole time period, as shown by the best fit of the simulated mean and expected mean. The histogram
plotted using Eq. 9 shows that the simulated data fit well in this case also as shown in Fig. 6 (b) as per the
normal fit. As can be seen in Fig. 6 (a), the weak astrocyte effect (where Aastro = 100mL is lower than
the initial concentrations of Aβ) would result in an increase in the concentrations of Aβ. The trends of the
weak and strong astrocyte effect models’ fitting to the simulated data over time for the average growth of
Aβ are shown in Figs (5-6). The pattern indicates a rise in the net growth rate of Aβ for the weak astrocytes
effect model (sM3 presented in Table 1). However, in Fig. 5 (a-b) for the strong astrocytes effect model
(sM2 presented in Table 1) the average growth of Aβ is decreasing. This shows that the strong astrocyte
effect has the greatest influence on the clearance Aβ. They help to slow down the growth of Aβ which
leads to reduced AD progression. Moreover, it was suggested that the weak astrocyte effect is an important
regulator of the brain’s inflammatory response and is a commonly recognized hallmark of AD [41].
17
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: (Color online) The temporal distribution of Aβ growth for strong and weak astrocytes effect models (i.e., sM2 −sM3)
and the mean and variance of fitted ADNI data for AD patients from bl to 2-years of visits as per patients age. The three curves show
the fitted Aβ data from 3 visits at bl, 12 months and 24 months for Aβbl(57), Aβ12−month−visits(57), Aβ24−monthvisits(57) =
200mL, 400mL, 600mL with respect to the age of the (a) strong astrocyte effect on Aβ growth model (sM2), Aastro = 700mL
and (b) weak astrocyte effect on Aβ growth model (sM3) presented in Table 1, Aastro = 100mL and the corresponding fitted
curves.
In Figs. (5-6) we fit the simulated data to the stochastic models (sM2 −sM3) presented in Table 1.
Using the same variable values, the next goal is to fit ADNI data to these stochastics to reveal the astrocyte
effect. Therefore, accordingly, we have fitted the ADNI data to the weak and strong astrocyte effect models
as presented in Fig.7 (a-b). We have fitted the curve for AD patients in between bl to 2-years of visits,
and their ages ranged from 50 −90 years. Both models provided a good fit to the ADNI data of Aβ as
per the fitted curves. We can compare the behaviour of both models (sM2 −sM3) with the best fit. The
initial conditions for Aβ are chosen here are Aβbl(57), Aβ12−month−visits(57), Aβ24−month−visits(57) =
200mL, 400mL, 600mL are the means of Aβ at baseline, 12 months, and 24 months visits with respect to
the ages of AD patients. We see in the growth curve for Aβbl(57) == 200 for the strong astrocyte effect
model (sM2 given in Table 1) as shown in Fig. 7 (a), is Aβ concentrations is decreasing for the patients
aged 50-70 years until the Aβ concentrations are less than Aastro, but we observed the opposite trend in
Fig. 7 (b). Since, there is a tremendous increase in the concentration of Aβ for the weak astrocyte effect
model, as shown in Fig. 7 (b) as the patient’s age increases. Moreover, it is depicted in Fig. 7 (a) that,
in the presence of a strong astrocyte effect when initial Aβ is less than Aastro, there is a rapid decrease
in the Aβ concentration, which means strong astrocytes effect helps to clear Aβ. Whereas, as known, the
weak astrocytes’ effect on Aβ growth will encourage chronic inflammatory activities in the brain, which
will lead to neuronal death or brain injury [42]. However, the strong astrocytes effect helps to reduce Aβ
growth. These findings imply and further confirm that Aβ-astrocyte interaction is pathologically harmful
and promotes AD [73, 41].
Moreover, the probability distribution function (pdf) has been estimated using Eq. 9, for both models,
as shown in Fig. 8(a-b) for Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600mL. Also, we have fitted the ADNI data set
(quantitative template) for AD patients as presented in Fig. 8 for strong and weak astrocyte models (sM2−
sM3) given in Table 1. The normal fit (red line) shows that the ADNI data fit well for Aβ concentrations
for both models presented in Fig. 8. The motivation behind analyzing only the AD patients as opposed to
NL, EMCI, etc, is that we can predict the weak and strong astrocyte effects on Aβ growth in the diseased
18
(a)
(b)
Figure 8: (Color online) Histograms of the fitted ADNI data for Aβ to the (a) strong and (b) weak astrocyte effect models (sM2
and sM3 presented in Table 1) using ABC technique for Aβ24−month−visits(57) = 600mL. The red lines represent the estimated
normal distribution that best fits the data.
brain. Further, the results presented in Figs. (7-8) for the ADNI data set and the predicted Aβ growth
are in agreement with those estimated for the simulated data in Figs. 5-6 [42]. As we pointed out earlier,
the stochastic nature of simulations and underlying random fluctuations result in slightly different starting
concentration values that might be different from the deterministic case.
Importantly, when it comes to fitting ADNI or simulated data, parameter estimation plays an important
role. In the present study, we provide a stochastic modelling framework and ABC technique in Sections
2.2-2.3 to distinguish predicted deviations for three stochastic models (sM1 −sM3), and we calibrate the
observed growth trajectories using the moment approach for stochastic parameter estimation. We perform
parameter estimation using the technique of moments approach for each stochastic model (i.e., sM1−sM3
presented in Table 1) [63]. This is done for the ADNI data set to test the hypothesis that our ABC framework
offers an alternate Aβ growth model with an astrocyte effect. Moreover, ABC and a maximum likelihood
parameter estimation technique (i.e., Eqs. 11-12) were used to infer the parameters of the stochastic models
[90, 60]. The goal of this technique is to find the values of the parameters that maximize the likelihood of
the observed data. In other words, it is the method of finding the best set of parameters that can explain the
data with the highest probability. In the present study for stochastic models (i.e., sM1 −sM3 presented
in Table 1, the unknown parameters are ra, rf, and Aastro, and we fixed γ. We define a range of values
for ra and rf that cover the plausible values of the parameters. For each combination of ra and rf values
in the defined ranges, we calculated the log-likelihood of the observed data using the maximum likelihood
estimation method. The likelihood function plot across ra and rf values, as depicted in Fig. 9 (a), can
provide useful information about the quality of the parameter estimates and the fit of the model to the ADNI
data.
Specifically, the likelihood function plot can show the range of parameter values that provide a good
fit to the data and the sensitivity of the likelihood to changes in the parameter values. According to Fig.
9 (a), the parameter estimations for the strong astrocyte effect model (sM2) were found to be quite close
to the true parameters (i.e., ra = 0.002413, rf = 0.0006536 adopted from [84]). Also, according to
profile likelihoods on parameter distributions, each parameter was virtually identifiable. That is, the profile
likelihood analysis of the fitted parameter ranges for the true parameter values of ra = 0.002413, and rf =
19
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: (Color online) (a)The parameters range examined is shown, and the parameter sets ra, rf are colored according to
likelihood estimation, showing that the ABC framework has converged on the true parameters, and (b) the rates represent the
values of accepted parameters (ra, rf ) for the ADNI data for a strong astrocyte effect model (sM2).
0.0006536, gave confidence intervals of [0.02132 −0.02476], and [0.00538 −0.00671], respectively. This
demonstrates how the ABC technique with likelihood selects the appropriate underlying model structure
from a list of options and determines the parameters with sufficient accuracy. In Fig. 9 (a), we provided
the demo of the accepted parameters for the ADNI data for the strong astrocyte effect model (sM2) on
birth-death as presented in Table 1. In a similar fashion, we can estimate the parameters for the weak
astrocyte effect model (sM3). For instance, as mentioned above, the ADNI data fit well per the mean,
variance, and normal distributions, and the parameter range revealed that the accepted parameter values
were close to the true values. However, due to the complexity of the ADNI data, there may be overfitting
occurs when a model or simulation is too complex or has too many parameters relative to the available
data. This scenario can be seen in Fig. 9 (b), where the parameter ra is converging initially but start
to diverge as the number of iterations increases. Therefore, the number of iterations should be chosen
wisely to balance the need for accuracy, stability, and convergence. In a similar fashion, using the Bayesian
approach, we estimate the parameters for the weak astrocyte model (sM3) and simple birth-death model
(sM1) presented in Table 1 using ADNI data. For the weak astrocyte effect model, the true parameter values
of ra = 0.00531, rf = 0.00004816, gave confidence intervals of [0.00491 −0.00582], and [0.00004173 −
0.00005100] and for a simple model, ra = 0.00231, and rf = 0.00146, gave confidence intervals of
[0.00199 −0.00300], and [0.00100 −0.00211]. Only the two unknown parameters (ra, rf) are shown in
Fig. 9 (a) as our representative examples. The true parameter values for Aastro for the present study are
adopted from the previous knowledge [10, 27, 31, 64, 72, 78, 84, 104]. However, using the same knowledge,
we supposed the values for Aastro to predict the strong and weak astrocyte effects on Aβ growth.
Next, for the strong and weak astrocyte effect models (sM2 −sM3) to perform maximum likelihood
parameter estimation for Aastro, we used the fminsearch function in MATLAB to minimize the negative
log-likelihood as given in Eqs. (12). This method involves starting with an initial guess for the parameter
values (in this case, Aastro = 700mL for sM2 and Aastro = 100mLfor sM3) and iteratively updating the
parameter value until the true parameter value is achieved as shown in Fig. 10 (a-b). The estimated value of
Aastro for the strong astrocyte model in Fig. 10 (a) is very close to the true value, as indicated by the position
of the red dot, which is considered a positive sign and suggests that the model is a good fit for the ADNI data,
20
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: (Color online) The likelihood analysis for Aastro for (a) strong astrocyte effect model (sM2), the red dot shows the
parameter estimate of Aastro = 698mL with the 95% confidence intervals [690–702]mL with true Aastro = 700mL and (b)
weak astrocyte effect model (sM3), the red dot shows the parameter estimate of Aastro = 98 with the 95% confidence intervals
[90–102] with true Aastro = 100mL as presented in Table 1 for the ADNI data. The red dotted line shows the maximum likelihood
whereas, the y-axis represents the negative log-likelihood function value.
accurately capturing the underlying mechanisms that govern the relationship between astrocyte activation
and brain function. Additionally, in a similar fashion, as depicted in Fig. 10 (b), for the weak astrocyte
model, the estimated value (the red dot) of Aastro is almost equal to the true value, it suggests that the model
is a good fit for the ADNI data. The red dotted line shows the maximum likelihood as shown in Fig. 10 (a)-
(b). It’s important to note that while Aastro may be a trivial function to minimize, the true value of Aastro
is not known a priori, and we estimated it from the data. In other words, the process of estimating Aastro
involves finding the parameter value that maximizes the likelihood of the observed data fitted in the model.
In practice, this process can be challenging because there may be multiple parameter values that yield similar
likelihood values, making it difficult to identify the true maximum likelihood estimate. Our study aims to
examine the effects of weak and strong astrocytes, the differences in concentration ranges of astrocytes
between Fig. 10 (a)-(b) are associated with the varying strengths of astrocytic effects. In this context, Fig.
10 (a) likely represents a scenario where astrocyte concentrations are higher, indicating a stronger presence
of astrocytes. On the other hand, Fig. 10 (b) represents a situation with lower astrocyte concentrations,
suggesting a weaker astrocytic presence. By correlating the concentration ranges of astrocytes in Fig.
10 (a)-(b) with the corresponding effects on Aβ observed in our study, we explored how the strength of
astrocytes influences the outcomes of interest.
Our data contained 1706 patients, and we divided our job into many processors. We have selected the
number of CPUs as the divisors of 1706. As a result, for 10, 000 iterations, for example, for 1 CPU, the
computational time is 5012.1s, for 2 CPU’s it is 140.3s. To attain the required total time for each model,
it often takes several million-time steps. If we solve the problem using conventional serial programming,
this requires a significant amount of computing time. Through the use of open MPI and the C programming
language, we can reduce computing time. We divide the sequential tasks involving the time step among
available processors for each time iteration and perform them in parallel. All figures have been plotted and
shown in Matlab after the data have undergone post-processing. To reduce the time required to acquire
results for the parallel computation, we employed the SHARCNET supercomputer facilities (64 cores).
21
5. Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to analyze the effect of astrocytes on the Aβ growth
in AD patients using ADNI data. This paper discussed in detail the weak and strong effects of astrocytes
on the increase of Aβ utilizing ADNI data for AD patients per the bl to 2-year visits according to the ages.
Additionally, we analyzed the growth of Aβ and considered whether the astrocyte effect, as it is known from
brain research, can be seen in deviations from exponential growth kinetics of Aβ predicted by mathematical
models that incorporate the astrocyte effect [13, 80, 105, 106, 107]. Since Aβ peptide can cause random
oscillations in the growth kinetics of Aβ (from one brain region to another) during the early stages of AD
development, we constructed stochastic models that account for the astrocyte effect. Through the use of
ADNI data for AD patients, we developed a framework for assessing the performance of stochastic models
of Aβ growth in AD. According to our results, we found that if the astrocyte effect is strong, that is the
concentrations of astrocytes are greater than the concentrations of Aβ, then astrocytes help to clear the Aβ.
Otherwise, the weak astrocyte effect, that is the low concentrations of astrocytes compared to Aβ, helps to
promote the progression of AD. Importantly, the development of Aβ deposits in AD patients is more likely
a dynamic process that is rapidly expanding than a static phenomenon. Once significant Aβ deposits have
been created, they remain at a high level, if not treated.
Human astrocytes interact closely and dynamically with neurons, which enables them to regulate the
homeostasis and functioning of the brain. Given their physiological roles, the involvement of astrocytes
in the dynamics of neurodegenerative brain diseases seems logical [105]. Moreover, the interactions of
astrocytes with neurons have been altered in a number of animal models of various neurological diseases
[104, 108, 109]. This suggests that the dysfunction of astrocytes could play a role in the development
or progression of these diseases. It is important to note that astrocytes are important for supporting and
regulating the function of neurons, so any changes in their interactions could affect the overall functioning
of the brain. Glial morphological and functional changes have been observed in human brain tissues from
post-mortem or surgically resected patients who had a variety of brain disorders [110, 111]. We presented
the strong and weak effects of astrocytes (i.e., sM2-sM3 models) in the human brains of AD patients using
clinical data. However, choosing mean values of Aβ as the initial conditions is a reasonable approach, but
incorporating additional factors that contribute to AD progression could further refine the initial conditions
and improve the accuracy of the simulation results. Using the ADNI dataset, we developed a fundamental
framework for simulating the onset and progression of AD in a clinical trial to make it simpler to assess
the efficacy of potential weak and strong effects of astrocytes. The release of inflammatory mediators that
cause neurotoxicity, such as IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, was known to be increased by Aβ-induced astrocyte
activation in the astrocyte-neuron co-culture, indicating a close connection between cytokine release and the
neurotoxic events that take place at low initial levels of Aβ [112]. Astrocytes and reactive astrocytes found
near Aβ plaques may be involved in local inflammation rather than direct Aβ absorption and breakdown
[42]. However, it is still unclear whether astrocytes truly migrate to the location of Aβ plaques or if the
shape of astrocytes already presents around the plaques simply changes. In recent research, it was shown
that the distribution of astrocytes in the brains of AD animal models with Aβ plaques was comparable to that
of wild-type mice [113]. Since persistent activation of astrocytes in response to Aβ-associated inflammation
is detrimental overall, reducing astrocyte activation may provide a novel therapeutic strategy to restore their
supporting roles and halt additional inflammation-mediated cell death.
A Bayesian model is an effective tool for forecasting the onset and course of AD and for evaluating the
effects of potential therapies in clinical trials, due to the complex and uncertain nature of the disease. Given
that there are sufficient data to get accurate estimates of the model parameters, the model presented in this
study should ideally be expanded to include more disease states. In addition, it is also known that gender,
22
education, and genetic background (including the presence or absence of astrocytes) are all significant risk
factors for AD. Additional elements, including family history, way of life, social standing, health, and
environment, can also have an impact [87]. So all these factors may also be beneficial to include in future
studies.
One additional important feature of the current research is that we demonstrated that the chance of
identifying the true parameters and astrocyte effect may be challenging due to the high uncertainty in the
clinical data. We note that the high level of uncertainty in the output of the simulations can be partially
attributed to the sparsity and heterogeneity of the data that are currently available as well as the high variance
in the measurements of the markers that have been used to categorize individuals into the various disease
states of AD patients. This should potentially be taken into account as covariates in extended models
because some of them can significantly affect the mean and variance of the model parameters that represent
how Aβ growth causes disease progression. The use of straightforward criteria to categorize people, such
as how well they perform on cognitive tests and any possible measurement error that may be present, may
affect the correct diagnosis and could play a significant role in the high variability [114]. Underlying medical
conditions such as the presence of depression or psychosis, AD progression, inter-clinician differences in
the application of diagnostic criteria, and resistance to cognitive decline due to cognitive reserve are some
of the other factors that can introduce variability in measurements, both within and between individuals, and
influence the diagnosis of the actual clinical stage [54, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119]. Furthermore, it has been
observed that detecting the genuine treatment impact may be difficult due to the significant uncertainty in
clinical trial results, even if the treatment is highly effective [120]. This might be one of the primary reasons
for the failure of AD therapy trials.
Limitations of our models stem from the simplifying assumption of a single pathway of Aβ changes
from different states (i.e., NL to MCI) to AD using ADNI data. The longitudinal progression of AD is
known to be heterogeneous. Clinical trials are challenging to run and expensive if large samples of patients
are studied over a long period of time and if the initial concentrations of Aβ are subject to change. Modelling
and simulating AD trials are very low-cost activities that may present indispensable tools for refining the
design of actual clinical trials and increasing the likelihood of correct treatment efficacy evaluations. Our
results are consistent with the previous theoretical and experimental studies [41, 121, 122, 123]. It is also
important to note that we defined our objective in this study as a description of the natural history of AD,
which includes biological and cognitive changes triggered by astrocytes in addition to AD pathology. Using
ADNI data, our modelling approach can estimate individual Aβ growth trajectories and allows us to extract
continuous information about the progression to AD. Individuals can be located along simulated trajectories
using the developed framework provided by parameter estimation and Bayesian inference based on ADNI
data. In addition, by obtaining estimates of astrocytes at the onset of AD, it may be possible to recruit
participants more effectively for clinical trials targeting preclinical AD [124, 125].
6. Conclusions
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is probably the most common cause of dementia. Although the mechanism
behind the onset and progression of AD is not fully known, mounting evidence points to a complex etiology
that may involve a variety of genetic, environmental, and age-related variables. Increasing evidence suggests
that astrocytes play an important and active role in many neurodegenerative disorders. Given the growing
interest in normal astrocyte biology and the numerous research studies on variations in astrocyte function in
the context of neurodegenerative diseases, it may come as a surprise that there are still no well-developed
therapies that utilize astrocytes as primary targets.
23
One of two pathological hallmarks of AD is the deposition of amyloid-β (Aβ) in the brain. The temporal
evolution of Aβ has been widely explored ex vivo. As a starting point, a logistic growth model can be used
to simulate the in vivo temporal distribution of Aβ in AD. Our ultimate objective was to concentrate on
the stochastic growth model of Aβ due to the intrinsic stochasticity of Aβ concentrations. However, the
structure of the functional forms of the kinetic equations describing the deposition of Aβ proteins in the
brain can be understood rather well within a deterministic framework. Therefore, firstly, we developed
three deterministic models for Aβ growth, viz., simple growth (Eq. 1), weak (Eq. 3), and strong (Eq.
4) astrocyte effect models. Then, we applied a stochastic modelling approach to analyze the evolution of
Aβ in vivo using ADNI data from AD patients to investigate the effect of astrocytes on Aβ spread in AD.
We detailed the stochastic approach using the quantitative template for the progression of the AD project
data set generated from the baseline to 2-year samples visits from ADNI1 and ADNIGO/2. Specifically,
we used the Aβ data for 1706 individuals with 6880 visits and clinical follow-up visits to fall within the
24-month window and analyzed the growth of Aβ with respect to age. Importantly, for the present study,
we chose the data for the patients who have already developed AD. The approximate Bayesian computation
(ABC) technique was used to determine whether the aforementioned stochastic models (i.e., sM1 −sM3
presented in Table 1 along with mean and variance presented in Table 2) were fitted well or not. The
stochastic trajectories of Aβ data were sampled from the bl to 2-years, corresponding to the age utilized.
In order to simulate the ADNI data as closely as possible, the growth of Aβ, as well as the mean and
variance, were calculated at each time point. In summary, the effectiveness of astrocytes in clearing Aβ in
AD was studied using stochastic growth models fitted to ADNI data. The study found that a strong astrocyte
effect, where astrocyte concentrations are greater than Aβ concentrations, helps to clear Aβ, leading to a
slower progression of AD. On the other hand, the weak astrocyte effect, where astrocyte concentrations are
lower than Aβ concentrations, promotes the progression of AD by enhancing Aβ growth. The stochastic
models used in the study were well-fitted and provided reliable parameter estimates. Therefore, it is clear
that astrocytes play a crucial role in AD progression. The development of treatments that enhance strong
astrocyte activation should be pursued to slow down AD progression.
Based on our observations, we have noticed a clear trend that as patients’ age increases, the growth
of Aβ also increases. This increase in Aβ growth has been observed in the absence of treatment. We
compared and validated our results with the previous studies [10, 41, 99, 100, 101, 121, 122, 123]. Inte-
grating astrocytes as an essential criterion for AD medication developments can potentially result in more
successful treatments for many millions of AD sufferers globally, given their crucial role in proper neuronal
functioning. With the addition of more patients, such as MCI, EMCI, and NL, to clinical trial data, it should
be possible to better predict the course of the disease and interpret model predictions more accurately in
future studies. It will aid further in identifying the sources of variation, facilitating progress toward the more
precise assessment of new preventative and therapeutic therapies for AD.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the NSERC and the CRC Program for their support. RM is also acknowl-
edging the support of the BERC 2022–2025 program and the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation
and Universities through the Agencia Estatal de Investigacion (AEI) BCAM Severo Ochoa excellence
accreditation SEV-2017–0718. This research was enabled in part by support provided by SHARCNET
(www.sharcnet.ca) and Digital Research Alliance of Canada (www.alliancecan.ca). The au-
thors are grateful to Prof. Paul Marriott of the University of Waterloo for his insightful comments on the
initial version of the manuscript.
24
Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initia-
tive (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense
award number W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National In-
stitute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following:
AbbVie, Alzheimer’s Association; Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica,
Inc.; Biogen; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; CereSpir, Inc.; Cogstate; Eisai Inc.; Elan Pharmaceuticals,
Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company Genentech,
Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research & Development,
LLC.; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development LLC.; Lumosity; Lundbeck; Merck
& Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis Phar-
maceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Takeda Pharmaceutical Company; and
Transition Therapeutics. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is providing funds to support ADNI
clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National In-
stitutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for
Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute at
the University of Southern California. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at
the University of Southern California.
References
[1] M. Lorenzi, M. Filippone, G. B. Frisoni, D. C. Alexander, S. Ourselin, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, et al.,
Probabilistic disease progression modeling to characterize diagnostic uncertainty: application to staging and prediction in
Alzheimer’s disease, NeuroImage 190 (2019) 56–68.
[2] B. T. Hyman, C. H. Phelps, T. G. Beach, E. H. Bigio, N. J. Cairns, M. C. Carrillo, D. W. Dickson, C. Duyckaerts, M. P.
Frosch, E. Masliah, et al., National institute on aging–Alzheimer’s association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment
of Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s & Dementia 8 (1) (2012) 1–13.
[3] C. M. Henstridge, B. T. Hyman, T. L. Spires-Jones, Beyond the neuron–cellular interactions early in Alzheimer disease
pathogenesis, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2) (2019) 94–108.
[4] D. R. Thal, U. R¨ub, M. Orantes, H. Braak, Phases of aβ-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development
of ad, Neurology 58 (12) (2002) 1791–1800.
[5] Y. Wang, M. Martinez-Vicente, U. Kr¨uger, S. Kaushik, E. Wong, E.-M. Mandelkow, A. M. Cuervo, E. Mandelkow, Tau
fragmentation, aggregation and clearance: the dual role of lysosomal processing, Human Molecular Genetics 18 (21) (2009)
4153–4170.
[6] A. R. Nelson, M. D. Sweeney, A. P. Sagare, B. V. Zlokovic, Neurovascular dysfunction and neurodegeneration in dementia
and Alzheimer’s disease, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Basis of Disease 1862 (5) (2016) 887–900.
[7] L. D. Goodman, H. J. Bellen, Recent insights into the role of glia and oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease gained from
drosophila, Current Opinion in Neurobiology 72 (2022) 32–38.
[8] N. Bhagwat, J. D. Viviano, A. N. Voineskos, M. M. Chakravarty, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, et al., Mod-
eling and prediction of clinical symptom trajectories in Alzheimer’s disease using longitudinal data, PLoS Computational
Biology 14 (9) (2018) e1006376.
[9] H. Hampel, J. Hardy, K. Blennow, C. Chen, G. Perry, S. H. Kim, V. L. Villemagne, P. Aisen, M. Vendruscolo, T. Iwatsubo,
et al., The amyloid-β pathway in Alzheimer’s disease, Molecular Psychiatry 26 (10) (2021) 5481–5503.
[10] A. Whittington, D. J. Sharp, R. N. Gunn, Spatiotemporal distribution of β-amyloid in Alzheimer disease is the result of
heterogeneous regional carrying capacities, Journal of Nuclear Medicine 59 (5) (2018) 822–827.
[11] T. Arendt, Alzheimer’s disease as a disorder of mechanisms underlying structural brain self-organization, Neuroscience
102 (4) (2001) 723–765.
[12] P. J. Visser, L. M. Reus, J. Gobom, I. Jansen, E. Dicks, S. J. Van der Lee, M. Tsolaki, F. R. Verhey, J. Popp, P. Martinez-
Lage, et al., Cerebrospinal fluid tau levels are associated with abnormal neuronal plasticity markers in Alzheimer’s disease,
Molecular Neurodegeneration 17 (1) (2022) 27.
[13] H. Shaheen, S. Singh, R. Melnik, A neuron-glial model of exosomal release in the onset and progression of Alzheimer’s
disease, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 15 (2021) 653097.
25
[14] S. E. Arnold, B. T. Hyman, J. Flory, A. R. Damasio, G. W. Van Hoesen, The topographical and neuroanatomical distribution
of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in the cerebral cortex of patients with Alzheimer’s disease, Cerebral Cortex
1 (1) (1991) 103–116.
[15] H. Braak, E. Braak, Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes, Acta Neuropathologica 82 (4) (1991) 239–
259.
[16] H.-L. Song, S. Shim, D.-H. Kim, S.-H. Won, S. Joo, S. Kim, N. L. Jeon, S.-Y. Yoon, β-amyloid is transmitted via neuronal
connections along axonal membranes, Annals of Neurology 75 (1) (2014) 88–97.
[17] S. Nath, L. Agholme, F. R. Kurudenkandy, B. Granseth, J. Marcusson, M. Hallbeck, Spreading of neurodegenerative pathol-
ogy via neuron-to-neuron transmission of β-amyloid, Journal of Neuroscience 32 (26) (2012) 8767–8777.
[18] C. C. Rowe, K. A. Ellis, M. Rimajova, P. Bourgeat, K. E. Pike, G. Jones, J. Fripp, H. Tochon-Danguy, L. Morandeau,
G. O’Keefe, et al., Amyloid imaging results from the australian imaging, biomarkers and lifestyle (aibl) study of aging,
Neurobiology of Aging 31 (8) (2010) 1275–1283.
[19] S. G. Mueller, M. W. Weiner, L. J. Thal, R. C. Petersen, C. R. Jack, W. Jagust, J. Q. Trojanowski, A. W. Toga, L. Beckett,
Ways toward an early diagnosis in Alzheimer’s disease: the Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative (adni), Alzheimer’s
& Dementia 1 (1) (2005) 55–66.
[20] S. Resnick, J. Sojkova, Y. Zhou, Y. An, W. Ye, D. Holt, R. Dannals, C. Mathis, W. Klunk, L. Ferrucci, et al., Longitudinal
cognitive decline is associated with fibrillar amyloid-beta measured by [11c] pib, Neurology 74 (10) (2010) 807–815.
[21] S. M. Landau, A. Fero, S. L. Baker, R. Koeppe, M. Mintun, K. Chen, E. M. Reiman, W. J. Jagust, Measurement of
longitudinal β-amyloid change with 18f-florbetapir pet and standardized uptake value ratios, Journal of Nuclear Medicine
56 (4) (2015) 567–574.
[22] N. Villain, G. Ch´etelat, B. Grassiot, P. Bourgeat, G. Jones, K. A. Ellis, D. Ames, R. N. Martins, F. Eustache, O. Salvado,
et al., Regional dynamics of amyloid-β deposition in healthy elderly, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: a
voxelwise pib–pet longitudinal study, Brain 135 (7) (2012) 2126–2139.
[23] R. J. Bateman, C. Xiong, T. L. Benzinger, A. M. Fagan, A. Goate, N. C. Fox, D. S. Marcus, N. J. Cairns, X. Xie, T. M.
Blazey, et al., Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease, N Engl J Med 367 (2012)
795–804.
[24] O. Hansson, J. Seibyl, E. Stomrud, H. Zetterberg, J. Q. Trojanowski, T. Bittner, V. Lifke, V. Corradini, U. Eichenlaub,
R. Batrla, et al., Csf biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease concord with amyloid-β pet and predict clinical progression: a
study of fully automated immunoassays in biofinder and adni cohorts, Alzheimer’s & Dementia 14 (11) (2018) 1470–1481.
[25] M. Nedergaard, B. Ransom, S. A. Goldman, New roles for astrocytes: redefining the functional architecture of the brain,
Trends in Neurosciences 26 (10) (2003) 523–530.
[26] G. Ricci, L. Volpi, L. Pasquali, L. Petrozzi, G. Siciliano, Astrocyte–neuron interactions in neurological disorders, Journal
of Biological Physics 35 (4) (2009) 317–336.
[27] M. J. Reid, P. Beltran-Lobo, L. Johnson, B. G. Perez-Nievas, W. Noble, Astrocytes in tauopathies, Frontiers in Neurology
11 (2020) 572850.
[28] V. Parpura, T. A. Basarsky, F. Liu, K. Jeftinija, S. Jeftinija, P. G. Haydon, Glutamate-mediated astrocyte–neuron signalling,
Nature 369 (6483) (1994) 744–747.
[29] A. Volterra, J. Meldolesi, Astrocytes, from brain glue to communication elements: the revolution continues, Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 6 (8) (2005) 626–640.
[30] S. S. Choi, H. J. Lee, I. Lim, J.-i. Satoh, S. U. Kim, Human astrocytes: secretome profiles of cytokines and chemokines,
PloS One 9 (4) (2014) e92325.
[31] A. N. Brandebura, A. Paumier, T. S. Onur, N. J. Allen, Astrocyte contribution to dysfunction, risk and progression in
neurodegenerative disorders, Nature Reviews Neuroscience (2022) 1–17.
[32] M. Santello, N. Toni, A. Volterra, Astrocyte function from information processing to cognition and cognitive impairment,
Nature Neuroscience 22 (2) (2019) 154–166.
[33] H.-G. Lee, M. A. Wheeler, F. J. Quintana, Function and therapeutic value of astrocytes in neurological diseases, Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 21 (5) (2022) 339–358.
[34] S. A. Liddelow, K. A. Guttenplan, L. E. Clarke, F. C. Bennett, C. J. Bohlen, L. Schirmer, M. L. Bennett, A. E. M¨unch, W.-S.
Chung, T. C. Peterson, et al., Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia, Nature 541 (7638) (2017)
481–487.
[35] Y. Shi, K. Yamada, S. A. Liddelow, S. T. Smith, L. Zhao, W. Luo, R. M. Tsai, S. Spina, L. T. Grinberg, J. C. Rojas, et al.,
Apoe4 markedly exacerbates tau-mediated neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy, Nature 549 (7673) (2017)
523–527.
[36] J. S. Sadick, S. A. Liddelow, Don’t forget astrocytes when targeting Alzheimer’s disease, British Journal of Pharmacology
176 (18) (2019) 3585–3598.
[37] H. Hong, E. Hwang, H. Sim, H. Cho, J. Boo, S. Oh, S. Kim, I. Mook-Jung, Interferon γ stimulates β-secretase expression
26
and sappβ production in astrocytes, Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 307 (4) (2003) 922–927.
[38] J. Zhao, T. O’Connor, R. Vassar, The contribution of activated astrocytes to aβ production: implications for Alzheimer’s
disease pathogenesis, Journal of Neuroinflammation 8 (1) (2011) 1–17.
[39] J. Park, I. Wetzel, I. Marriott, D. Dr´eau, C. D’Avanzo, D. Y. Kim, R. E. Tanzi, H. Cho, A 3d human triculture system
modeling neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease, Nature Neuroscience 21 (7) (2018) 941–951.
[40] A. C. LeBlanc, M. Papadopoulos, C. B´elair, W. Chu, M. Crosato, J. Powell, C. G. Goodyer, Processing of amyloid precursor
protein in human primary neuron and astrocyte cultures, Journal of Neurochemistry 68 (3) (1997) 1183–1190.
[41] G. R. Frost, Y.-M. Li, The role of astrocytes in amyloid production and Alzheimer’s disease, Open Biology 7 (12) (2017)
170228.
[42] Y. S. Batarseh, Q.-V. Duong, Y. M. Mousa, S. B. Al Rihani, K. Elfakhri, A. Kaddoumi, Amyloid-β and astrocytes interplay
in amyloid-β related disorders, International Journal of Molecular Sciences 17 (3) (2016) 338.
[43] J. Hardy, D. J. Selkoe, The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics,
Science 297 (5580) (2002) 353–356.
[44] J. Hardy, Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis: an update and reappraisal, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease
9 (s3) (2006) 151–153.
[45] B. De Strooper, E. Karran, The cellular phase of Alzheimer’s disease, Cell 164 (4) (2016) 603–615.
[46] L. A. Demetrius, P. J. Magistretti, L. Pellerin, Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid hypothesis and the inverse warburg effect,
Frontiers in Physiology 5 (2015) 522.
[47] B. Winblad, P. Amouyel, S. Andrieu, C. Ballard, C. Brayne, H. Brodaty, A. Cedazo-Minguez, B. Dubois, D. Edvardsson,
H. Feldman, et al., Defeating Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias: a priority for european science and society, The
Lancet Neurology 15 (5) (2016) 455–532.
[48] M. Kivipelto, K. H˚akansson, A rare success against Alzheimer’s, Scientific American 316 (4) (2017) 32–37.
[49] J. W. Ashford, F. A. Schmitt, Modeling the time-course of alzheimer dementia, Current Psychiatry Reports 3 (1) (2001)
20–28.
[50] J. A. Rogers, D. Polhamus, W. R. Gillespie, K. Ito, K. Romero, R. Qiu, D. Stephenson, M. R. Gastonguay, B. Corrigan,
Combining patient-level and summary-level data for Alzheimer’s disease modeling and simulation: a beta regression meta-
analysis, Journal of Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics 39 (5) (2012) 479–498.
[51] M. N. Samtani, M. Farnum, V. Lobanov, E. Yang, N. Raghavan, A. DiBernardo, V. Narayan, Alzheimer’s Disease Neu-
roimaging Initiative, An improved model for disease progression in patients from the Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging
initiative, The Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 52 (5) (2012) 629–644.
[52] K. Ito, B. Corrigan, Q. Zhao, J. French, R. Miller, H. Soares, E. Katz, T. Nicholas, B. Billing, R. Anziano, et al., Disease
progression model for cognitive deterioration from Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative database, Alzheimer’s &
Dementia 7 (2) (2011) 151–160.
[53] J. Mar, M. Soto-Gordoa, A. Arrospide, F. Moreno-Izco, P. Mart´ınez-Lage, Fitting the epidemiology and neuropathology of
the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease to prevent dementia, Alzheimer’s Research & Therapy 7 (1) (2015) 1–8.
[54] C. Hadjichrysanthou, A. K. Ower, F. de Wolf, R. M. Anderson, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, The devel-
opment of a stochastic mathematical model of Alzheimer’s disease to help improve the design of clinical trials of potential
treatments, PloS One 13 (1) (2018) e0190615.
[55] D. P. Veitch, M. W. Weiner, P. S. Aisen, L. A. Beckett, C. DeCarli, R. C. Green, D. Harvey, C. R. Jack Jr, W. Jagust, S. M.
Landau, et al., Using the Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative to improve early detection, diagnosis, and treatment
of Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s & Dementia 18 (4) (2022) 824–857.
[56] W. Hao, S. Lenhart, J. R. Petrella, Optimal anti-amyloid-beta therapy forAlzheimer’sdisease via a personalized mathematical
model, PLoS Computational Biology 18 (9) (2022) e1010481.
[57] C. Green, J. Shearer, C. W. Ritchie, J. P. Zajicek, Model-based economic evaluation in Alzheimer’s disease: a review of the
methods available to model Alzheimer’s disease progression, Value in Health 14 (5) (2011) 621–630.
[58] M. A. Beaumont, Approximate bayesian computation, Annual Review of Statistics and its Application 6 (2019) 379–403.
[59] V. Sathiyamoorthi, A. Ilavarasi, K. Murugeswari, S. T. Ahmed, B. A. Devi, M. Kalipindi, A deep convolutional neural
network based computer aided diagnosis system for the prediction of Alzheimer’s disease in mri images, Measurement 171
(2021) 108838.
[60] D. Calvetti, E. Somersalo, Inverse problems: From regularization to bayesian inference, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Computational Statistics 10 (3) (2018) e1427.
[61] Y. Xia, N. Zabaras, Bayesian multiscale deep generative model for the solution of high-dimensional inverse problems,
Journal of Computational Physics 455 (2022) 111008.
[62] S. Konishi, G. Kitagawa, Bayesian information criteria, Information Criteria and Statistical Modeling (2008) 211–237.
[63] F. Fr¨ohlich, P. Thomas, A. Kazeroonian, F. J. Theis, R. Grima, J. Hasenauer, Inference for stochastic chemical kinetics using
moment equations and system size expansion, PLoS Computational Biology 12 (7) (2016) e1005030.
27
[64] S. J. Miller, Astrocyte heterogeneity in the adult central nervous system, Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 12 (2018) 401.
[65] A. J. Vincent, R. Gasperini, L. Foa, D. H. Small, Astrocytes in alzheimer’s disease: emerging roles in calcium dysregulation
and synaptic plasticity, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 22 (3) (2010) 699–714.
[66] M. V. Sofroniew, H. V. Vinters, Astrocytes: biology and pathology, Acta neuropathologica 119 (2010) 7–35.
[67] G. Meisl, T. P. Knowles, D. Klenerman, Mechanistic models of protein aggregation across length-scales and time-scales:
From the test tube to neurodegenerative disease, Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 (2022).
[68] K. E. Johnson, G. Howard, W. Mo, M. K. Strasser, E. A. Lima, S. Huang, A. Brock, Cancer cell population growth kinetics at
low densities deviate from the exponential growth model and suggest an allee effect, PLoS Biology 17 (8) (2019) e3000399.
[69] S. F. Grieco, T. C. Holmes, X. Xu, Probing neural circuit mechanisms inAlzheimer’sdisease using novel technologies,
Molecular Psychiatry (2023) 1–14.
[70] C.-C. Lee, A. Nayak, A. Sethuraman, G. Belfort, G. J. McRae, A three-stage kinetic model of amyloid fibrillation, Biophys-
ical Journal 92 (10) (2007) 3448–3458.
[71] Y. S. Kim, H. M. Jung, B.-E. Yoon, Exploring glia to better understand Alzheimer’s disease, Animal Cells and Systems
22 (4) (2018) 213–218.
[72] R. Thuraisingham, A kinetic scheme to examine the role of glial cells in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease, Metabolic
Brain Disease 37 (3) (2022) 801–805.
[73] W. Hao, A. Friedman, Mathematical model onAlzheimer’sdisease, BMC Systems Biology 10 (1) (2016) 1–18.
[74] M. T. Heneka, M. K. O’Banion, Inflammatory processes in Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Neuroimmunology 184 (1-2)
(2007) 69–91.
[75] A. Rocchi, S. Pellegrini, G. Siciliano, L. Murri, Causative and susceptibility genes for Alzheimer’s disease: a review, Brain
Research Bulletin 61 (1) (2003) 1–24.
[76] R. Deane, A. Sagare, K. Hamm, M. Parisi, S. Lane, M. B. Finn, D. M. Holtzman, B. V. Zlokovic, et al., apoe isoform–
specific disruption of amyloid β peptide clearance from mouse brain, The Journal of Clinical Investigation 118 (12) (2008)
4002–4013.
[77] T. Palabas, J. J. Torres, M. Perc, M. Uzuntarla, Double stochastic resonance in neuronal dynamics due to astrocytes, Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals 168 (2023) 113140.
[78] S. F. Carter, K. Herholz, P. Rosa-Neto, L. Pellerin, A. Nordberg, E. R. Zimmer, Astrocyte biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease,
Trends in Molecular Medicine 25 (2) (2019) 77–95.
[79] S. Pal, H. Shaheen, R. Melnik, The influence of amyloid-beta on calcium dynamics inAlzheimer’sdisease: A spatio-temporal
study, in: Computational Science and Its Applications–ICCSA 2022 Workshops: Malaga, Spain, July 4–7, 2022, Proceed-
ings, Part I, Springer, 2022, pp. 308–322.
[80] S. Pal, R. Melnik, Coupled neural–glial dynamics and the role of astrocytes inAlzheimer’sdisease, Mathematical and Com-
putational Applications 27 (3) (2022) 33.
[81] M. Olsen, X. Aguilar, D. Sehlin, X. T. Fang, G. Antoni, A. Erlandsson, S. Syv¨anen, Astroglial responses to amyloid-beta
progression in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Molecular Imaging and Biology 20 (4) (2018) 605–614.
[82] S. Lesn´e, F. Docagne, C. Gabriel, G. Liot, D. K. Lahiri, L. Bu´ee, L. Plawinski, A. Delacourte, E. T. MacKenzie, A. Buisson,
et al., Transforming growth factor-β1 potentiates amyloid-β generation in astrocytes and in transgenic mice, Journal of
Biological Chemistry 278 (20) (2003) 18408–18418.
[83] I. Blasko, R. Veerhuis, M. Stampfer-Kountchev, M. Saurwein-Teissl, P. Eikelenboom, B. Grubeck-Loebenstein, Costimula-
tory effects of interferon-γ and interleukin-1β or tumor necrosis factor α on the synthesis of aβ1-40 and aβ1-42 by human
astrocytes, Neurobiology of Disease 7 (6) (2000) 682–689.
[84] S. Fornari, A. Sch¨afer, E. Kuhl, A. Goriely, Spatially-extended nucleation-aggregation-fragmentation models for the dy-
namics of prion-like neurodegenerative protein-spreading in the brain and its connectome, Journal of Theoretical Biology
486 (2020) 110102.
[85] D. Bertens, D. L. Knol, P. Scheltens, P. J. Visser, A. D. N. Initiative, et al., Temporal evolution of biomarkers and cognitive
markers in the asymptomatic, mci, and dementia stage of alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s & Dementia 11 (5) (2015)
511–522.
[86] W. J. Jagust, S. M. Landau, A. D. N. Initiative, et al., Temporal dynamics of β-amyloid accumulation in aging and alzheimer
disease, Neurology 96 (9) (2021) e1347–e1357.
[87] M. Bilgel, B. M. Jedynak, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, et al., Predicting time to dementia using a quanti-
tative template of disease progression, Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring 11 (2019)
205–215.
[88] S. C. Burnham, S. M. Laws, C. A. Budgeon, V. Dor´e, T. Porter, P. Bourgeat, R. F. Buckley, K. Murray, K. A. Ellis, B. A.
Turlach, et al., Impact of apoe-ε4 carriage on the onset and rates of neocortical aβ-amyloid deposition, Neurobiology of
Aging 95 (2020) 46–55.
[89] R.-N. Liu, Y.-M. Kang, Stochastic master equation for early protein aggregation in the transthyretin amyloid disease, Sci-
28
entific Reports 10 (1) (2020) 1–9.
[90] M. A. Beaumont, W. Zhang, D. J. Balding, Approximate bayesian computation in population genetics, Genetics 162 (4)
(2002) 2025–2035.
[91] C. P. Robert, J.-M. Cornuet, J.-M. Marin, N. S. Pillai, Lack of confidence in approximate bayesian computation model
choice, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (37) (2011) 15112–15117.
[92] S. Fornari, A. Sch¨afer, M. Jucker, A. Goriely, E. Kuhl, Prion-like spreading of alzheimer’s disease within the brain’s con-
nectome, Journal of the Royal Society Interface 16 (159) (2019) 20190356.
[93] L. Bronstein, H. Koeppl, A variational approach to moment-closure approximations for the kinetics of biomolecular reaction
networks, The Journal of Chemical Physics 148 (1) (2018) 014105.
[94] H. Shaheen, R. Melnik, S. Sundeep, Data-driven stochastic model for quantifying the interplay between amyloid-beta and
calcium levels in Alzheimer’s disease, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10373 (2023).
[95] M. M. Ghazi, M. Nielsen, A. Pai, M. Modat, M. J. Cardoso, S. Ourselin, L. Sørensen, Robust parametric modeling
ofAlzheimer’sdisease progression, NeuroImage 225 (2021) 117460.
[96] Y. Zhang, W. Wang, Mathematical analysis for stochastic model ofAlzheimer’sdisease, Communications in Nonlinear Sci-
ence and Numerical Simulation 89 (2020) 105347.
[97] K. Xu, E. Darve, Solving inverse problems in stochastic models using deep neural networks and adversarial training, Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 384 (2021) 113976.
[98] T. B. Thompson, P. Chaggar, E. Kuhl, A. a. N. I. Goriely, Protein-protein interactions in neurodegenerative diseases: A
conspiracy theory, PLoS Computational Biology 16 (10) (2020) e1008267.
[99] J. Sojkova, Y. Zhou, Y. An, M. A. Kraut, L. Ferrucci, D. F. Wong, S. M. Resnick, Longitudinal patterns of β-amyloid
deposition in nondemented older adults, Archives of Neurology 68 (5) (2011) 644–649.
[100] V. L. Villemagne, K. E. Pike, G. Ch´etelat, K. A. Ellis, R. S. Mulligan, P. Bourgeat, U. Ackermann, G. Jones, C. Szoeke,
O. Salvado, et al., Longitudinal assessment of aβ and cognition in aging and Alzheimer disease, Annals of Neurology 69 (1)
(2011) 181–192.
[101] A. G. Vlassenko, M. A. Mintun, C. Xiong, Y. I. Sheline, A. M. Goate, T. L. Benzinger, J. C. Morris, Amyloid-beta plaque
growth in cognitively normal adults: Longitudinal [11c] pittsburgh compound b data, Annals of Neurology 70 (5) (2011)
857–861.
[102] L. Mosconi, A. Rahman, I. Diaz, X. Wu, O. Scheyer, H. W. Hristov, S. Vallabhajosula, R. S. Isaacson, M. J. de Leon, R. D.
Brinton, Increased Alzheimer’s risk during the menopause transition: a 3-year longitudinal brain imaging study, PloS One
13 (12) (2018) e0207885.
[103] P. S. Insel, E. C. Mormino, P. S. Aisen, W. K. Thompson, M. C. Donohue, Neuroanatomical spread of amyloid β and tau in
Alzheimer’s’s disease: implications for primary prevention, Brain Communications 2 (1) (2020) fcaa007.
[104] P. Bedner, A. Dupper, K. H¨uttmann, J. M¨uller, M. K. Herde, P. Dublin, T. Deshpande, J. Schramm, U. H¨aussler, C. A. Haas,
et al., Astrocyte uncoupling as a cause of human temporal lobe epilepsy, Brain 138 (5) (2015) 1208–1222.
[105] E. Dossi, F. Vasile, N. Rouach, Human astrocytes in the diseased brain, Brain Research Bulletin 136 (2018) 139–156.
[106] B. Urbanc, L. Cruz, S. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Irizarry, H. Stanley, B. Hyman, Dynamics of plaque formation in Alzheimer’s
disease, Biophysical Journal 76 (3) (1999) 1330–1334.
[107] A. Raj, E. LoCastro, A. Kuceyeski, D. Tosun, N. Relkin, M. Weiner, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI,
et al., Network diffusion model of progression predicts longitudinal patterns of atrophy and metabolism in Alzheimer’s
disease, Cell Reports 10 (3) (2015) 359–369.
[108] S. Jo, O. Yarishkin, Y. J. Hwang, Y. E. Chun, M. Park, D. H. Woo, J. Y. Bae, T. Kim, J. Lee, H. Chun, et al., Gaba from
reactive astrocytes impairs memory in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease, Nature Medicine 20 (8) (2014) 886–896.
[109] Y. Zhang, S. A. Sloan, L. E. Clarke, C. Caneda, C. A. Plaza, P. D. Blumenthal, H. Vogel, G. K. Steinberg, M. S. Ed-
wards, G. Li, et al., Purification and characterization of progenitor and mature human astrocytes reveals transcriptional and
functional differences with mouse, Neuron 89 (1) (2016) 37–53.
[110] H. Funato, M. Yoshimura, T. Yamazaki, T. C. Saido, Y. Ito, J. Yokofujita, R. Okeda, Y. Ihara, Astrocytes containing amyloid
beta-protein (abeta)-positive granules are associated with abeta40-positive diffuse plaques in the aged human brain., The
American Journal of Pathology 152 (4) (1998) 983.
[111] N. A. Oberheim, X. Wang, S. Goldman, M. Nedergaard, Astrocytic complexity distinguishes the human brain, Trends in
Neurosciences 29 (10) (2006) 547–553.
[112] C. Garwood, A. Pooler, J. Atherton, D. Hanger, W. Noble, Astrocytes are important mediators of aβ-induced neurotoxicity
and tau phosphorylation in primary culture, Cell Death & Disease 2 (6) (2011) e167–e167.
[113] E. Galea, W. Morrison, E. Hudry, M. Arbel-Ornath, B. J. Bacskai, T. G´omez-Isla, H. E. Stanley, B. T. Hyman, Topological
analyses in app/ps1 mice reveal that astrocytes do not migrate to amyloid-β plaques, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 112 (51) (2015) 15556–15561.
[114] D. Bishara, Y. Xie, W. K. Liu, S. Li, A state-of-the-art review on machine learning-based multiscale modeling, simulation,
29
homogenization and design of materials, Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 30 (1) (2023) 191–222.
[115] P. J. Neumann, S. Araki, A. Arcelus, A. Longo, G. Papadopoulos, K. S. Kosik, K. Kuntz, A. Bhattacharjya, Measuring
Alzheimer’s disease progression with transition probabilities: estimates from cerad, Neurology 57 (6) (2001) 957–964.
[116] E. L. Abner, R. J. Kryscio, G. E. Cooper, D. W. Fardo, G. A. Jicha, M. S. Mendiondo, P. T. Nelson, C. D. Smith, L. J. Van El-
dik, L. Wan, et al., Mild cognitive impairment: statistical models of transition using longitudinal clinical data, International
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 2012 (2012).
[117] Y. Stern, The concept of cognitive reserve: a catalyst for research, Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology
25 (5) (2003) 589–593.
[118] B. Schmand, J. H. Smit, M. I. Geerlings, J. Lindeboom, The effects of intelligence and education on the development of
dementia. a test of the brain reserve hypothesis, Psychological Medicine 27 (6) (1997) 1337–1344.
[119] N. P. Oxtoby, A. L. Young, D. M. Cash, T. L. Benzinger, A. M. Fagan, J. C. Morris, R. J. Bateman, N. C. Fox, J. M. Schott,
D. C. Alexander, Data-driven models of dominantly-inherited Alzheimer’s disease progression, Brain 141 (5) (2018) 1529–
1544.
[120] F. McDougall, C. Edgar, M. Mertes, P. Delmar, P. Fontoura, D. Abi-Saab, C. Lansdall, M. Boada, R. Doody, Psychome-
tric properties of the clinical dementia rating—sum of boxes and other cognitive and functional outcomes in a prodromal
Alzheimer’s disease population, The Journal of Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease 8 (2021) 151–160.
[121] A. Verkhratsky, M. Olabarria, H. N. Noristani, C.-Y. Yeh, J. J. Rodriguez, Astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease, Neurothera-
peutics 7 (4) (2010) 399–412.
[122] J. Torok, C. Anand, P. Verma, A. Raj, Connectome-based biophysics models of Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis and prognosis,
Translational Research (2022).
[123] L. Caberlotto, L. Marchetti, M. Lauria, M. Scotti, S. Parolo, Integration of transcriptomic and genomic data suggests
candidate mechanisms for apoe4-mediated pathogenic action in Alzheimer’s disease, Scientific Reports 6 (1) (2016) 1–
10.
[124] K. G. Yiannopoulou, S. G. Papageorgiou, Current and future treatments in alzheimer disease: an update, Journal of Central
Nervous System Disease 12 (2020) 1179573520907397.
[125] C. Song, J. Shi, P. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, L. Zhao, R. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Chen, Immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease:
Targeting β-amyloid and beyond, Translational Neurodegeneration 11 (1) (2022) 18.
30
