Multiple Stakeholders in Music Recommender Systems
Himan Abdollahpouri
DePaul University
USA
habdolla@depaul.edu
Steve Essinger
Pandora Media, Inc.
USA
sessinger@pandora.com
ABSTRACT
Music recommendation services collectively spin billions of songs
for millions of listeners on a daily basis. Users can typically listen to
a variety of songs tailored to their personal tastes and preferences.
Music is not the only type of content encountered in these services,
however. Advertisements are generally interspersed throughout
the music stream to generate revenue for the business. Additional
content may include artist messaging, ticketing, sports, news and
weather. In this paper, we discuss issues that arise when multiple
content providers are stakeholders in the recommendation process.
Tese stakeholders each have their own objectives and must work
in concert to sustain a healthy music recommendation service.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems (RS) have been applied successfully in many
domains to help users ﬁnd interesting items and avoid the problem
of information overload. Examples of RS include: Amazon, where
customers can use recommendations from the system so they can
ﬁnd desirable products easier; Netﬂix, where the system helps users
ﬁnd interesting movies to watch; Pandora and Spotify, which helps
users navigate vast catalogs of content to listen to their favorite
artists.
For the most part, the research on RS has been focused on situ-
ations where the system has no preference about which product
owners the content shown to the user originates from, just as long
as the user is happy with the current recommendation. While this
may be acceptable in some applications, there are examples where
the recommendations from diﬀerent stakeholders (e.g. product
owners) produce diﬀerent utilities both to the system and users.
For example, if we consider advertisers as stakeholders who want
their ads to be shown to the users along with the traditional rec-
ommended products, then it is obvious that recommending ads
gives diﬀerent utility to the system than recommending products.
Te system may make more money from showing a paid ad rather
than recommending consumable content. However, from the users’
perspective the situation may be diﬀerent. Users do not really care
about ads as much as they want to see their personalized recom-
mendations.
A music recommendation business is an example of managing
several diﬀerent stakeholders that are involved in delivering con-
tent. Each stakeholder may have their own incentive to get their
content in front of the end user and they may compete or collab-
orate with each other depending upon the context. In this paper,
we discuss how a music recommender service may be viewed as a
multi-stakeholder environment where each stakeholder has their
Included in the 2017 Workshop on Value-Aware and Multistakeholder Recommenda-
tion held in conjunction with RecSys 2017.
own utility function and goal. Tese stakeholders could include
various artists, advertisers or other content providers.
2
STAKEHOLDERS IN MUSIC
RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS
Pandora is one of the world’s largest music recommendation compa-
nies in terms of active users and songs recommended. Te platform
consists of a variety of diﬀerent stakeholders working together to
provide users with the best experience, while simultaneously keep-
ing the business alive by generating revenue. Some stakeholders
are more user-experience focused so their utility function is closer
to what the end user actually wants. Other stakeholders have utility
functions which are more revenue-focused and business-oriented.
For example, the stakeholder responsible for recommending songs
(i.e. music recommender) is focused on delivering the best possible
song at the right time to the right end user. Terefore, its objective
goal is closely related to what end users want from the system. On
the other hand, the stakeholder that is responsible for advertising,
ad service, is mainly interested in delivering the right ad to the right
user at the right time. Generally, users have less interest for ads
than songs. Terefore, we can say that the ad service stakeholder’s
utility is mainly towards more revenue, which is not a primary
consideration of the music recommender.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of the recommendation platform
consisting of diﬀerent stakeholders. While there may be more ﬁne-
grained stakeholders, we only showed four of them for simplicity.
For example, the music recommender stakeholder is responsible
for coming up with the best possible song to play for the user. As
we mentioned earlier, this stakeholder is mainly concerned about
the needs and interests of the end user. On the other hand, the ad
services is responsible to ﬁnd the best time to interrupt the song
recommendation to show an ad to the user. In fact, this stakeholder
does this calculation based on many diﬀerent factors such as the
contract rules the ad service has with the advertisers, companies
ﬁnancial agenda, etc. Tere are also a couple of other stakeholders
in the platform such as ticketing and artist messages. Te ticketing
works similar to the ad services, but instead of ads, there are tick-
ets for which the system tries to ﬁnd customers. It is important
to note that the business rules and utility function for the ticket-
ing stakeholder might be completely diﬀerent from the ad service
even though they both do the similar task of promoting secondary
content (i.e. content other than music). Te artist messages are
recorded audio messages from artists containing information re-
garding an upcoming concert, album or merchandise. Finally, there
is the content service that sits on top of the individual stakeholders.
Tis is responsible for managing the diﬀerent stakeholders and to
make the ﬁnal decision about which content to show to a particular
user at a certain time.
arXiv:1708.00120v1  [cs.CY]  1 Aug 2017
VAMS’17, August 2017, Como, Italy
Himan Abdollahpouri and Steve Essinger
Figure 1: Te architecture of a music recommendation platform consisting of multiple stakeholders.
Figure 2: A sequence of various content served to the user. Te recommender system should decide what to play for the current
slot, indicated by the rightmost box.
In this paper, our focus is mainly on sequential music recommen-
dation where content is recommended one afer another. Figure 2
shows a sequence of diﬀerent content played to the user in the
current session. Te sequence contains a variety of content such
as songs, ads, artist messages and tickets. Given what has been
served to the user thus far, the RS should decide the best content
to play for the next slot in the user’s session. Tis slot is shown by
the box containing a question mark on the rightmost side of the
diagram. All stakeholders try to push their content through the
system so that they could be shown to the user. However, since
this is a sequential recommendation platform where only a single
piece of content can be served at a given time, the content service
manager decides which content from one of the stakeholders can
occupy this spot.
Certain types of content are more beneﬁcial to the system than
others and this is a factor taken into account in the ﬁnal decision.
For example, as shown in ﬁgure 2, ads, artist messages and tickets
bring money to the system, while songs cost the system money (i.e.
there is a royalty per each song played). Te balance between the
long-term and short-term goals of the system must be considered.
Greedy decisions such as playing content based purely on maximiz-
ing revenue, while ignoring the end user needs will hurt the system
in the long term (i.e. users may not return to the system resulting
in fewer users and fewer opportunities to make money via ads). On
the contrary, playing only songs will not result in any revenue and
the system would not be able to continue service. Terefore, both
short-term (make users happy) and long-term goals (run a healthy
business) should be considered when deciding what content to play
for a user at any given time.
Diﬀerent artists could also be viewed as stakeholders in terms
of what they want from the system. Artists may have diﬀering
goals in puting their songs on a music recommendation platform
such as Pandora. For example, some artists might be interested in
targeting a certain age-group in certain locations and certain times.
Perhaps they have a upcoming concert and they want to give more
awareness to their targeted audience. In addition, the system might
want to promote songs from certain artists to give them a boost
in the number of listeners and help them achieve more popularity.
However, it is important to take the fairness factors into account in
Multiple Stakeholders in Music Recommender Systems
VAMS’17, August 2017, Como, Italy
promoting artists so that the system does not over-promote some
artists at the price of ignoring others.
3
RELATED WORK
Te concept of multiple stakeholders has been discussed in some
prior research. For example, in reciprocal recommendation, a suc-
cessful recommendation is not the one that is only acceptable by
the receiver of the recommendation. In fact, the needs and inter-
ests of the other part of the recommendation (i.e. the person who
is being recommended) is also important for having a successful
match [1]. Researchers working on multi-objective optimization
also investigated the problem of having diﬀerent objectives and
constraints when generating recommendations. Tese objectives
are ofen diﬀerent evaluation metrics such as accuracy, popularity
bias, novelty and diversity [2, 3] or they are some sort of constraint
imposing certain limitations on the solution [4]. Te most explicit
deﬁnition of having multiple stakeholders in a recommendation
seting has been discussed in [5] where authors re-deﬁned the rec-
ommender systems as multi-stakeholder environments in which
multiple stakeholders involve in diﬀerent stages of the recommenda-
tion generation and each beneﬁt from the recommendation delivery
in various ways. For example, in [6], the authors discuss a scenario
which seeks ’fairness’ across multiple product suppliers. Moreover,
in [7] authors identify paterns of stakeholder utility that character-
ize diﬀerent multi-stakeholder recommendation application, and
provide a taxonomy of the diﬀerent possible systems. Tere are
many other domains in which multiple stakeholders are involved
in the recommendation process. For example, online dating [1],
educational recommenders [8] and loan recommendation in micro-
ﬁnance platforms [9] are all instances of recommendations where
diﬀerent stakeholders are involved in receiving or delivering the
recommendations.
REFERENCES
[1] Luiz Pizzato, Tomek Rej, Tomas Chung, Irena Koprinska, and Judy Kay. 2010.
RECON: a reciprocal recommender for online dating. In Proceedings of the fourth
ACM conference on Recommender systems. ACM, 207-214.
[2] Michael Jugovac, Dietmar Jannach, and Lukas Lerche. 2017. Eﬃcient optimiza-
tion of multiple recommendation quality factors according to individual user
tendencies. Expert Systems with Applications 81 (2017), 321-331
[3] Himan Abdollahpouri, Robin Burke, and Bamshad Mobasher. 2017. Controlling
Popularity Bias in Learning to Rank Recommendation. In Proceedings of the
11th ACM conference on Recommender systems. ACM.
[4] Tamas Jambor and Jun Wang. 2010. Optimizing multiple objectives in collabora-
tive ﬁltering. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM conference on Recommender
systems. ACM, 55-62
[5] Himan Abdollahpouri, Robin Burke, and Mobasher Bamshad. 2017. Recom-
mender systems as multi-stakeholder environments. In Proceedings of the 25th
Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP2017).
ACM.
[6] Robin D. Burke, Himan Abdollahpouri, Bamshad Mobasher, and Trinadh Gupta.
2016. Towards Multi-Stakeholder Utility Evaluation of Recommender Systems. In
Workshop on Surprise, Opposition, and Obstruction in Adaptive and Personalized
Systems, UMAP 2016
[7] Robin Burke and Himan Abdollahpouri. 2017. Paterns of Multistakeholder Rec-
ommendation. In 1st International Workshop on Value-Aware and Multistake-
holder Recommendation at RecSys 2017
[8] Robin Burke and Himan Abdollahpouri. 2016. Educational Recommendation with
Multiple Stakeholders. In Web Intelligence Workshops (WIW), IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on. IEEE, 62-63
[9] Eric L Lee, Jing-Kai Lou, Wei-Ming Chen, Yen-Chi Chen, Shou-De Lin, YenSheng
Chiang, and Kuan-Ta Chen. 2014. Fairness-aware loan recommendation for
microﬁnance services. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on
Social Computing. ACM, 3.
