Introduction to Gestural Similarity in Music.
An Application of Category Theory to the
Orchestra
Maria Mannone∗
School of Music,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA
THIS IS NOT the latest version.
The latest version has been published
by the Journal of Mathematics and Music.
April 24, 2019
Abstract
Mathematics, and more generally computational sciences, intervene
in several aspects of music. Mathematics describes the acoustics of the
sounds giving formal tools to physics, and the matter of music itself in
terms of compositional structures and strategies. Mathematics can also be
applied to the entire making of music, from the score to the performance,
connecting compositional structures to acoustical reality of sounds. More-
over, the precise concept of gesture has a decisive role in understanding
musical performance. In this paper, we apply some concepts of category
theory to compare gestures of orchestral musicians, and to investigate the
relationship between orchestra and conductor, as well as between listeners
and conductor/orchestra. To this aim, we will introduce the concept of
gestural similarity. The mathematical tools used can be applied to gesture
classiﬁcation, and to interdisciplinary comparisons between music and vi-
sual arts. Keywords: gesture; performance; orchestral conducting; cate-
gory theory; similarity; composition; visual arts; interdisciplinary studies;
fuzzy logic
Introduction
The topic of musical gestures in performance and composition is the object of an
increasing interest from scholars [2, 17, 37, 53]. Interest in gestural comparison
is a natural consequence. New research about the mathematical description of
gestures starts from piano, moves to orchestral conducting, and reaches singing
∗manno012@umn.edu
1
arXiv:1904.10340v1  [math.HO]  22 Apr 2019
as ‘inner movement’ [37, Chapter 37]. The topic of musical similarity is another
important object of research [11, 21, 31].
In music, gestures are the intermediary between musical thinking and acous-
tics. Musical scores contain playing instructions and performers interact with
their instruments via gestures to produce a speciﬁc sound result. Gestures are
also involved in musical perception [48].
In this article, we focus on the comparison, in terms of gestural similarity,
among gestures of the orchestral musicians, conductor’s gestures, and special-
ization of the conductor’s instructions into the movements of each musician,
using the framework of category theory [28]. We will also brieﬂy refer to visual
arts, using the concept of gesture to connect them with music.
The interest of scholars in categories is motivated by their recent applica-
tions in physics and other sciences [51], and, more generally, in philosophy and
diagrammatic thinking [1]. Mathematical music theory that uses category the-
ory has already been developed [40], as well as diﬀerential calculus for musical
analysis and musical gestures [33, 38, 40]. In conclusion, we refer to fuzzy logic
for the deﬁnition of the degree of gestural similarity. The fuzzy logic had already
been applied to music while investigating the relations between emotions and
music [45].
The state of the art of the mathematical theory of musical
gestures
What is a musical gesture? We can intuitively think of the movements of a
dancer (gestures) while touching the ﬂoor at discrete points (notes), see Figure
1.
We can distinguish two diﬀerent types of gestures: symbolic and physical
gestures. The ﬁrst are derived from the information contained in the score, and
the second are the performer’s real movements, see the top of Figure 1. Let
us refer to the case of the pianist as a starting point. The symbolic gesture is
derived from information such as the MIDI-like command “play this key, at this
time, and with this loudness.” The symbolic gesture contains straight lines and,
in principle, it can require an inﬁnite speed for the transition from pressed to
released key, and from one note to another. The physical gesture is given by the
real, physically-possible movements made by performers in non-zero time and
ﬁnite speed, represented by the hands’ smooth paths (their smooth curves) in
space and time.
Symbolic gestures can be transformed into physical ones via an ideal con-
necting surface, the world-sheet. This formal tool, coming from string theory
[57] in theoretical physics—in fact, we are comparing the continuous curves of
gestures to strings—is interpreted here as a hypergesture.1 See Section 1.4 for
1In string theory, point-like particles are substituted by vibrating strings.
In [33] the
paradigm of string theory is used to describe musical performance in terms of gestures, rather
than notes and sounds as isolated events. The ‘particles’ correspond to the notes. To un-
derstand music as unfolding in time, rather than as isolated “points in time,” we can study
gestures to understand music. However, the “strings” here are not vibrating: thus, such a
2
Figure 1: The general scheme of mathematical performance theory, from gestures (top) to
notes (bottom). From the original German notation adopted in [40], H indicates symbolic
pitch, h physical pitch, E symbolic onset, e physical onset. The other parameters are here
omitted for graphical reasons.
The graphs in the upper part of the image represent the
gesture of the ﬁngertip on piano keyboard, in the simpliﬁed case onset (in abscissa) and
vertical position (in ordinate).
more details. However, because a gesture is a trajectory in a conﬁguration space,
we can formally study symbolic and physical gesture curves in the framework
of Banach spaces and functional analysis. This would constitute a valid, and
more precise, alternative approach to the string-theoretical one.
In this article, we refer more speciﬁcally to similarity between physical ges-
tures. The concept of similarity, and even the term itself, had already been used
in several musical contexts [21], for example while referring to notes and mo-
tives: we can think of “inner” comparisons inside the same musical composition
[11], of motives’ classiﬁcation [10] and compositions’ comparisons, including an
adaptation of the formalism of physics to study memory [31, 32].
Similarity can also be introduced for gestures, while dealing with classiﬁ-
cation.2 How can we compare a gesture with other gestures of the same kind
(piano with piano), or other kinds (piano with violin)? We may also wonder how
to connect musical gestures with other forms of artistic expression (for exam-
ple, drawing), or with external references, as in expressive gesture performance
reference to string theory is just a general metaphor.
2For a precise but non-mathematical approach to gesture classiﬁcation in the framework
of mixed music (electroacoustic and with traditional instruments), see [3]; the term similarity
is used to qualitatively describing imitational gestures, see [19].
3
studies [45].
In this article we compare gestures having the same (or a similar) generator.
We will make implicit use of homotopic transformation (see Paragraph 6.1 in
the Appendix), as also proposed in contexts of gesture following [2, 8]. Let us
consider the following example. When the orchestral conductor signals a forte
for tutti, every musician makes a gesture or a combination of the more appro-
priate gestures depending on the technique of his or her musical instrument,
to obtain acoustical spectra inside the desired range of loudness and timbre.
Their gestures are thus similar (in loudness). We can intuitively ﬁnd examples
of such a concept also from composition. For example, while thinking of a deli-
cate gesture, even outside music, the composer can write down a combination of
notes, dynamics, tempi, to suggest to the performer a delicate ﬁnal result. The
performer then recreates, by using his or her knowledge of gestural technique, a
sound as close as possible to the one thought by the composer3 and ﬁltered by
the sensibility of the performer.
An inverse mechanism aﬀects listening and music perception.
A listener
judges a musical performance as ‘expressive’ if he or she feels, also beyond mu-
sic, a gestural reference to be translated into mental images, a mental feeling.
We can here refer to the concept of emotions and words viewed as hidden ges-
tures [54], and refer to semiotics.4 There can be cases where there is not any
‘human’ gestural generator, as for electronic music, but the feeling of a clear
gesture is recreated in the mind of the listener, and other cases when this pro-
cess is not possible. Some studies compare ‘human’ and electronic gestures, and
describe analysis and creative developments of electronic music with respect to
traditional musical instruments [3]. Even the artistic inspiration may be seen
in light of gestural similarity, extending the language of artistic aesthetics to
include the ‘ineﬀable’ inside the ‘calculable’ and understandable.
This article is structured as follows. After a list of preliminary mathematical
concepts (Section 1), a ﬁrst approach to gestural similarity is presented (Section
2), with a discussion of the role of conductor (Section 2.1), composer to con-
ductor (Section 3), and some short references to music and visual arts (Section
4). Some ﬁnal remarks about the possible role of fuzzy logic in classiﬁcation
problems, as elements of future research, and an appendix with some comments
on homotopic transformation and more mathematical details on musical gesture
theory, conclude the article.
3Of course, in the limit that such a thinking can be inferred from the score.
4We will not go deeper into detail with semiotics.
The passage from a simple, instru-
mental movement to an expressive movement may raise issues about semiotics. For example,
a “caressing” piano touch is not only ﬁnalized to get a sound, but a sound with a speciﬁc,
soft timbre, that also carries a meaning, the meaning of a caressing gesture. Visualization of
such a gesture is also relevant for the perception of the intended meaning. An accurate study
of this ﬁeld should require a separate and detailed description, as well as some perception
experiments, to substantiate the connection between our mathematical approach with the
musicological studies in the ﬁeld [18, 19].
4
skeleton
body
g
Figure 2:
An example of a gesture, a mapping from an oriented graph to a system of
continuous curves in a topological space, from [36]. We can compare this approach to a topic
of neuroscience, about how to embed time-discrete symbolreﬁc processes into continuous time
of neural processes [6].
1
Gestures and hypergestures
We need some preliminary mathematical tools before starting our analysis and
investigation of gestural similarity.
1.1
Mathematical deﬁnition of gesture
Gestures have been mathematically deﬁned as mappings from directed graphs to
systems of continuous curves in topological spaces [36]. More precisely, we start
from an abstract system of points and connecting arrows which is a directed
graph ∆, as shown on the left of Figure 2. We map this directed graph to a
system of continuous curves5 in a space6 X, with the same conﬁguration as the
directed graph ∆, as shown on the right of Figure 2. The directed graph ∆is
called the gesture’s skeleton, whereas the system of continuous curves constitutes
the body of the gesture in ⃗X. With ⃗X we indicate a set of mappings in X (when
we add a topology, ⃗X becomes the space of curves in X). A gesture is then
a mapping g : ∆→⃗X. We denote the space of all gestures from ∆to ⃗X as
∆@ ⃗X, notation used in [36] for Hom(∆, ⃗X).
When we equip ∆@ ⃗X with a
topology, we denote it as ∆⃗@X. This is the space of gestures. A curve in the
space of gestures (in ∆⃗@X) is a gesture of gestures, and is called hypergesture.7
Parametrized hypergestures are described in Section 6.3.1.
5A curve c in X is a continuous function c : I →X, where I = [0, 1] is the real unit interval.
6The space ⃗X is a topological space, e.g. spacetime.
7This is the name introduced in [36] and used in the related literature.
However, as
suggested by a reader of these works, we could perhaps use the term metagesture.
5
1.2
Gesture morphisms
A morphism of two gestures transforms one gesture into another. Let us refer to
diagram 1, containing two gestures, g : ∆→⃗X and h : Σ →⃗Y . We deﬁne two
functions, t and m. The function t is a transformation8 from the skeleton ∆to
the skeleton Σ, and the continuous function9 m, from the topological space X
to Y . We can also deﬁne ⃗m : ⃗X →⃗Y for the curves having points in X and Y
respectively. These functions, jointly with the requirement of commutativity of
diagram 1, deﬁne a morphism between gestures: in fact, a morphism of gestures
is such a pair f = (t, m) of morphisms of digraphs and topological spaces,
respectively, such that ⃗m ◦g = h ◦t [38].
∆
g - ⃗X
Σ
t
?
h - ⃗Y
⃗m
?
(1)
Throughout the paper, we will frequently refer to morphisms of gestures while
describing the deformation of gestures with particular characteristics, such as
a gesture giving a speciﬁc musical dynamic (e.g. piano) into a gesture giving a
diﬀerent dynamic (e.g. forte). In general, we can deﬁne a category of gestures,
with the deﬁned morphisms as morphisms between gestures.10 Such a formalism
can be seen in terms of 2-categories [26]. For example, two points in the space
are 0-cells; a gesture between them is a 1-cell, and a hypergesture between two
gestures is a 2-cell. If we treat point as gestures, 1-cells are hypergestures, and
2-cells are hyper-hypergestures.
1.3
Homotopies of gestures
In the gesture follower system, the identiﬁcation of gestures is based on recogni-
tion of classes of gestures, that we can consider as homotopy classes of gestures
[2, 9, 12, 53]. The authors do not use a category theoretic framework.
A homotopy of two gestures connects them via an entire family of interme-
diary gestures—we have a progressive ‘deformation’ of a gesture into the other.
To understand homotopies of gestures, we can intuitively think of examples such
as anamorphosis frequently used in Escher’s drawings. We consider a param-
eter λ, with λ = 0 for the ﬁrst gesture, and λ = 1 for the second one. The
progressive transformation of the ﬁrst gesture into the second one is given by
all the gestures labeled with values of λ ranging between 0 and 1. This means
that for every λ ∈[0, 1], we have a gesture. A homotopic connection between
8For example, a transformation t∗modiﬁes the skeleton ∆= . →., that is an arrow
between two points, into another skeleton Γ = . →. →., with one more point and arrow.
9More precisely, m is a continuous functor of topological categories.
10The category of gestures can be described as a comma category (id, ⃗·) , where id is the
identity on directed graphs, and⃗· , deﬁned from spaces to directed graphs, is the functor that
associates to a space X the digraph ⃗X with the paths in X.
6
gestures does not automatically imply also a functional relation between them:
it is another result, not true a priori. The use of a parameter λ for gestural
comparisons recalls fuzzy logic11 [22], as discussed in the concluding Section 5.
Some more considerations about homotopy, with references to the physics of
sound, are given in Paragraph 6.1 of the Appendix, with a “physical” statement
about similar gestures (see the Euristic Conjecture 6.1).
1.4
Hypergestures
The concept of hypergesture generalizes that of homotopy. As explained before,
in a (topological) gesture space, where each point is a gesture, a curve con-
necting points is a gesture of gestures, a hypergesture. The diﬀerence between
hypergestures and morphisms is also stressed in [36]. In the case of morphisms,
we verify the relations between skeleta and bodies that are compatible; in the
second case, we build curves in the space of gestures. A particular case of hyper-
gesture is the world-sheet, the ideal surface connecting symbolic and physical
gestures, see [33] for a ﬁrst example. However, in this article we will not use the
formalism of world-sheets for our analysis.
The main structure gesture / hypergesture suggests the use of the 2-categories
formalism. In principle, because we can build hypergestures of higher order, we
may extend the formalism to ∞−categories. The topic of inﬁnite categories
and quasicategories was investigated extensively by [20] and [27]. Music can
be analyzed through nested structures. For example, a gesture (0-cell) connects
two points (an arrow between points); a crescendo is a hypergesture (1-cell) that
connects less loud gestures with louder gestures (an arrow between two arrows);
and an accelerando is a hyper-hypergesture (2-cell) that transforms a slower
crescendo into a faster crescendo (an arrow between arrows connecting arrows).
We can build N-cells (and ideally ∞-cells) by adding each time transformations
and transformations of transformations.
2
Mathematics for similar gestures of orchestral
musicians
Let us start from a simple pianistic gesture (a primitive up-down), and an
equivalent movement for a percussive gesture, let it be on a vibraphone or a
xylophone. In both cases there is a ‘percussive’ gesture/generation of the sound.
Let gφ be the physical gesture of the pianist P, and hφ the gesture of the
percussionist Pc. Let us for simplicity choose the same skeleton for both. The
two gestures are:
gφ : ∆→⃗X,
hφ : ∆→⃗Y .
(2)
11We will not delve into details about fuzzy logic. Whereas Deﬁnition 2.1 assesses a crite-
rion of gestural similarity, we can more precisely talk about degrees of gestural similarities,
with inﬁnite intermediate values between perfect similarity of two identical gestures and two
completely unrelated ones.
7
The topological spaces for the two instruments are diﬀerent, and so is the
space of their curves. We start with the same skeleton ∆for both gestures,
an arrow connecting two points. We use the formalism of category theory to
characterize the action of the potential.12 For a reference about world-sheet,
force ﬁeld, and potential see Paragraph 6.4 in the Appendix. Let gφ be the
physical gesture of the pianist, represented here as the result of the action of a
function fP : gσ →gφ, where P stands for the ‘piano’ instrument. The function
fP has, as its variable, symbolic gestures gσ with unspeciﬁed dynamics (that we
will indicate as a 0-potential). The physical pianistic gesture corresponding to a
forte dynamic is here given as a result of the same function, with a non-vanishing
potential FP as second argument:
gφ = fP (gσ, 0),
gF
φ = fP (gσ, FP ).
(3)
Here, gφ stands for g0
φ. Equivalently, the percussionist’s gesture is:
hφ = fP c(hσ, 0),
hF
φ = fP c(hσ, FP c).
(4)
We can also represent the same situation with the (commutative) diagram 5,
where gF
φ = F ◦gφ. The operator F transforms ‘generic’ curves in ⃗X into forte
curves in ⃗X, that is, (gφ ∈) ⃗X →(gF
φ ∈) ⃗X.
∆
gF
φ - ⃗X
⃗X
F
6
gφ
-
(5)
The digraph morphism F : ⃗X →⃗X is an endomorphism of arrows of ⃗X,
because the gestural curves with unspeciﬁed dynamic (that we indicate here
as with 0-potential) are in the same space of the curves with forte dynamic
(F-potential for us). The digraph morphism F : ⃗X →⃗X indicates a curve in
the space of potentials, as already done in the case of voice [37]. We change
the values, but we always are in the same space.
There is an entire family
of gestures generated by the choice of potential forte.
There is a homotopy
of connected (linked) gestures, with the second obtained from the ﬁrst via a
functional composition (and this, they are not independent).
We have been composing plain morphisms of graphs. To simplify the former
and the following diagrams, as well as to give a description that is coherent with
the 1-cell and the 2-cell deﬁnitions, we can use 2-cell notation. In a 2-categorical
12If restricted to the physical curve, the potential is related to the force as known in common
physical situations.
And, of course, the force strongly inﬂuences the touch and the ﬁnal
spectral result at the level of acoustics. A more general ‘artistic force’ determines the shape
of the entire surface of the world-sheet.
8
context, diagram 5 can be modiﬁed as diagram 6.
∆
⃗X
gφ
gF
φ
F
(6)
We are transforming the curves within the space ⃗X, modifying the loudness
coordinate via the velocity/acceleration. We may also describe such a musi-
cal situation in the space of phases with position and speed, as often done in
physics. In such a space, a crescendo would be easily described as a hypergesture
connecting gestures with diﬀerent coordinates of loudness.
To summarize, we start from a physical gesture gφ = f(gσ, ◦) from a certain
symbolic gesture gσ and a potential ◦, giving the dynamic. We could think of
◦as a generic potential V , that is then specialized when a particular dynamic
(forte, mezzoforte) is indicated. A transformation 0 →F with the forte induces
a deformation of the gestural curve into another realizing the forte dynamic as
result of the interaction between performer and musical instrument: we have
gφ →gF
φ , where gF
φ = f(gσ, F). The transformation of the potential 0 →F can
be described by a continuous function13 V (t), that is equal to 0 at t = 0, and
to F at t = 1, the coordinate t being a generic parameter, or a time coordinate.
We can describe a crescendo via diagram 7. We start from a gesture g with
unspeciﬁed dynamic, we then identify the required transformation (i.e. gestural
deformation) to get the piano and forte respectively, and then we deﬁne a tem-
poral transformation PF that brings the piano gesture gP
φ into the forte gesture
gF
φ , that is the crescendo. In terms of potentials, we have the transformation
F = PF ◦P.
gP
φ
P F
- gF
φ
gφ
F
-

P
(7)
In terms of 2-category formalism, diagram 7 can be re-drawn as diagram 8,
using the vertical composition property.
∆
⃗X
=
∆
⃗X
gφ
gP
φ
gF
φ
P
P F
gφ
gF
φ
F
(8)
Let us now explicitly use functionality. We reach the forte curves in ⃗X via
f (◦, F) for the forte F, and f(◦, 0) without any speciﬁed dynamic, where the
13More generally, we can deﬁne a gesture via a function f containing such a V (t) function.
f(gσ, V (t)) =: gφ(t) =
(
g0
φ,
for t = 0
gF
φ ,
for t = 1
)
9
symbol ◦indicates the place reserved for the symbolic gesture. Here, we choose
an elementary skeleton14 ∆=↑, and a simple symbolic gesture that is the image
of such an abstract curve, indicated here also with ↑. We have f (↑, F) = gF
φ
and f(↑, 0) = gφ, F ◦f(↑, 0) = f(↑, F), and the diagram 9 commutes.
↑
f(↑,F )- ⃗X
⃗X
F
6
f(↑,0) -
(9)
Two main questions arise:
1. Is this homotopy?
2. Is the process gφ →gF
φ functional (well-deﬁned)?
The answer to both questions is aﬃrmative for the following reasons.
1. Homotopy. There is homotopy between the two gestures, because there is
an entire family of intermediate gestures continuously connecting the ﬁrst
and the second one. The potentials themselves are connected by a family
of potentials, going from 0 and reaching F.
2. Functionality.
The process is also functional, for the reason expressed
above: the gesture f(↑, F) is functionally obtained from f(↑, 0) via the
composition with F. In fact, gF
φ ≡F ◦gφ.
Let us now extend the previous discussion to include percussionists’ gestures.
We again use the label P for the piano, and the label Pc for the percussion. In
fact, this time we distinguish between FP and FP c, acting on diﬀerent spaces.
Diagram 10 shows the pianist’s gesture (right) and the percussionist’s gesture
(left), having the same skeleton ∆.
⃗Y 
hF
φ
∆
gF
φ - ⃗X
⃗Y
FP c
6

hφ
⃗X
FP
6
gφ
-
(10)
⃗Y
∆
⃗X
gF
φ
gφ
hF
φ
hφ
FP c
FP
(11)
14We denote by ↑the digraph having two vertices that are connected by one arrow.
10
Diagram 11 shows the same content of diagram 10 in a 2-categorical context.15
The two triangles in diagram 10 show functional transformations. How can
we connect ⃗Y to ⃗X and compare the two gestures g and h? We think of g and h
as being ‘gesturally similar,’ because we can transform the one into the other via
an homotopic transformation, and they lead to similar timbres both modiﬁed
into forte—see the Euristic Conjecture 6.1. We will now consider two diﬀerent
skeleta, and the change of skeleta ∆→Γ, as shown in diagram 12, provided we
are given a continuous function m such that m : X →Y .
⃗X
∆
gF
φ -
gφ
-
⃗X

FP
Γ
t
?
hF
φ - ⃗Y
⃗m
?
⃗Y
⃗m
?

FP c
hφ
-
(12)
The two triangles are commutative because gF
φ = FP ◦gφ and hF
φ = FP c ◦hφ,
as well the square of diagram 13.
∆
gF
φ - ⃗X
Γ
t
?
hF
φ - ⃗Y
⃗m
?
(13)
This means that there is a morphism of gestures, as deﬁned in Section 1.2.
Diagram 12, with 2-category formalism, looks like diagram 14.
15We can observe that, in the framework of 2-category formalism, vertical and horizontal
composition properties are intuitively veriﬁed. Vertical composition means, in our orchestral
context, transformation of loudness: a piano gesture can be deformed into a forte gesture, that
can be deformed into a fortissimo gesture. Horizontal composition, given the same skeleton,
means here transition from the space of gestures for a musical instrument, for example piano,
to the space of gestures of another instrument, as percussion, and then to another instrument,
such as violin.
11
∆
⃗X
Γ
⃗Y
t
gF
φ
gφ
FP
⃗m
hφ
hF
φ
FPc
(14)
Under which conditions is diagram 12 commutative also with ⃗X and ⃗Y ?
The similarity deﬁnition also includes the commutativity, in diagram 12, of the
square shown in diagram 15.
⃗X  FP
⃗X
⃗Y
⃗m
?
 FP c
⃗Y
⃗m
?
(15)
Similar gestural generators are supposed to provoke similar changes in the
timbres, for example the creation of two forte gestures from gestures with an
unspeciﬁed loudness. But, ﬁrst of all, the changes have to happen in the appro-
priate spaces. Diagram 12 is not commutative when, for example, the generative
process is similar but the resulting spectrum is not. If we strongly hit the ﬂute
with a piano hammer, it will not sound louder, and a strong use of the bow on a
ﬂute will not make a stronger ﬂute sound. They are examples of forte gestures
in non-appropriate spaces for the ﬂute. This means that we cannot apply the
same “generator” FP of pianistic forte, to obtain a forte gesture on ﬂute. We
need another generator, a FF l, to transform generic curves of ﬂute playing into
forte curves (gestures having as result a forte sound). FF l does not act on ⃗X
but on some ⃗Z, where ⃗Z is the space of curves for the ﬂute playing. The spaces
⃗X and ⃗Z can be connected by a suitable m function to transform the space of
gestures of an instrument into the space of gestures of another instrument.
We can ﬁnally give a ﬁrst deﬁnition of gestural similarity, as expressed in
Deﬁnition 2.1.
Deﬁnition 2.1. Two gestures gF
φ : ∆→⃗X and hF
φ : Γ →⃗Y are similar, and
we write gF
φ ∼hF
φ , if it is possible to ﬁnd:
1. A morphism from the ﬁrst to the second, it means, two functions t : ∆→Γ
and m : X →Y such that diagram 13 is commutative;
2. Two homotopic transformations16 FP : ⃗X →⃗X and FP c : ⃗Y →⃗Y , with
16Two homotopic curves can be continuously transformed the one into the other. A homo-
topic transformation continuously transforms curves in curves.
12
the common generators FP and FP c acting in the same way17 in their
spaces respectively, such that FP ◦gφ = gF
φ and FP c ◦hφ = hF
φ .
Let us see more details in Example 2.2.
Example 2.2. Let us suppose ad absurdum that two gestures g1, g2 for the same
instrument (topological space ⃗X), with unspeciﬁed dynamic but sharing the
same skeleton, are similar. If the skeleta are the same, we have an identity map
between them. We also have an identity for the topological space X →X, being
the two gestures for the same instrument. So we have a gesture morphism with
identities in this case, and point (1) is satisﬁed. However, because the dynamic
is unspeciﬁed, we also have unspeciﬁed generators. This implies that point (2)
is not satisﬁed, and thus the hypothesis of similarity is not veriﬁed. In fact,
two gestures cannot be similar if they are obtained via two generators acting in
diﬀerent ways in their respective spaces (the same in our case). We can consider
a forte gesture and a piano gesture, both for the same musical instrument, for
example percussion Pc, with the same skeleton. We have an identity for the
topological space Y →Y . The two generators FP c : ⃗Y →⃗Y and PP c : ⃗Y →⃗Y
do not act in the same way: the ﬁrst selects forte curves, while the second piano
curves. We have FP c◦hφ = hF
φ and PP c◦hφ = hP
φ , and point (2) is not satisﬁed.
See also the Heuristic Conjecture 6.1 in Paragraph 6.1 of the Appendix for
a physical condition about acoustical spectra. The musical meaning of Deﬁni-
tion 2.1 is the following. A forte gesture for the pianist and a forte gesture of
the percussionist (in our example) are similar because:
1. It is possible to transfer (connect) the forte on the piano to the forte on a
percussion;
2. The generator that transforms generic (neutral) gestures on piano into
forte gestures on piano is the same generator that transforms generic ges-
tures on a percussion into forte gestures on a percussion, acting in diﬀerent
spaces in the same way.
Both forte gestures18 can be projected into the forte conducting gestures, using
the categorical notion of colimit (Section 2.1). To decide if the two generators
FP and FP c act in the same way in their spaces, and, consequently, if two
resulting gestures are similar, we can also use concepts from fuzzy logic.
A
gesture can belong to a category but also partially to another one. For example,
a range of variability allows the distinction of several forte gestures, that are all
equally well-working for the same musical passage. This opens another potential
research in the application of fuzzy logic to category theory [55] for music.
17Similar deformations in their respective spaces lead to similar eﬀects in their resulting
sound spectra. See Paragraph 6.1 in the Appendix for two graphic representations, Figures 3
and 4.
18We discussed loudness, but gestural similarity can also involve articulation, and in some
cases also rhythmic-melodic proﬁles. Even speciﬁc harmonic sequences can suggest particular
gestural solutions. We can think of a deceptive cadence, highlighted by the performer with a
fermata or a forte. In fact, elements from musical analysis can act as weights for gestures.
13
2.1
Conducting gestures
The conductor’s gesture is specialized into gestures of all orchestral musicians,
and it may be described as their colimit. For the listener, the conducting gesture
can constitute a limit.19 We can think of a person trying to get information
about the orchestral sound by watching conducting gestures on a video with
the audio turned oﬀ. We are considering limit and colimit because the listener
(i. e., each of the listeners in the audience) refers to the orchestra, and all the
orchestral instruments refer to the conductor. Moreover, the conductor, while
studying the score, prepares his or her gesture depending on the orchestration,
meaning what orchestral musicians are supposed to play. The listener creates
his or her mental idea of the music depending on what orchestral performers
are playing.
We indicate orchestral gestures as D, conductor’s gestures is their colim(D),
while the audience is the lim(D).
We can draw diagram 17, including the contribution of the conductor (with
⃗C), where FC (⃗mC,F ), associated to the conductor’s gesture, transforms con-
ducting generic curves (with unspeciﬁed dynamic) into forte curves.
In this
diagram, to simplify the graphical representation, we omit the skeleton of the
19Intuitively, limits and colimits are generalizations of products and coproducts, respectively.
The product is a special case of the limit, with discrete categories. The coproduct (also called
sum) is the dual of the product, obtained by reversing the arrows. Given an object P and two
maps p1 : P →B1, p2 : P →B2, P is a product of B1, B2 if for each object X and for each
pair of arrows f1, f2 we have only and only one arrow f : X →P such that f1 = p1f, f2 = p2f
[25], see diagram 16.
X
P
f
?
B2

f2

p2
B1
f1
-
p1
-
(16)
14
conducting gesture.
⃗X
∆
gF
φ -
gφ
-
⃗X

FP
⃗C
⃗mC,P,0 -
⃗C

FC
⃗mC,P,F -
Γ
t
?
hF
φ - ⃗Y
⃗m
?
⃗mC,P c,F -
⃗C
Id
?

FC
⃗Y
⃗mC,P c,0 -

FP c
hφ
-
(17)
In diagram 17, we distinguish the functions bringing the conductor’s gesture to
the pianist and to the percussionist. Summarizing, we have:
• gesture without speciﬁed dynamic of the pianist reﬂected into the basic
metric gesture (no indication of dynamic) of the conductor: ⃗mC,P,0 : ⃗X →
⃗C,
• gesture without speciﬁed dynamic of the percussionist reﬂected into the
basic metric gesture (no indication of dynamic) of the conductor: ⃗mC,P c,0 :
⃗Y →⃗C,
• gesture of forte for the pianist reﬂected into the conductor’s forte: ⃗mC,P,F :
⃗X →⃗C,
• gesture of forte for the percussionist reﬂected into the conductor’s forte:
⃗mC,P c,F : ⃗Y →⃗C,
• basic metric gesture transformed into the forte one of the conductor: FC :
⃗C →⃗C,
• identity Id transforming conductor’s basic metric gesture into itself.
Diagrams 18 show the two commutative squares conductor-pianist and conductor-
percussionist from diagram 17, respectively.
⃗X
⃗mC,P,0- ⃗C
⃗X
FP
?
⃗mC,P,F- ⃗C
FC
?
⃗Y
⃗mC,P c,0- ⃗C
⃗Y
FP c
?
⃗mC,P c,F- ⃗C
FC
?
(18)
15
These diagrams commute because it is equivalently possible that:
• The pianist plays forte because the conducting basic metric gesture has
been modiﬁed by the operator forte;
• The conductor gives a basic metric gesture and the pianist decides to play
forte for reasons of expressivity or written indication.
This second case can happen, for example, for scores where rhythm and other
speciﬁc indications are so complicated that the conductor needs to give simple
metric indications. In formulas, we have, for the pianist, FC ◦⃗mC,P,0 = ⃗mC,P,F ◦
FP , and the same for the percussionist, substituting Pc to P.
Diagram 19 shows the gestural similarity between the forte gesture of the
pianist and the percussionist (via ⃗m), and their reﬂection into the conducting
forte gesture, for the pianist (via ⃗mC,P,F ) and the percussionist (via ⃗mC,P c,F ).
⃗X
⃗C
⃗mC,P,F -
⃗Y
⃗m
?
⃗mC,P c,F -
(19)
Using 2-categories, we can schematize diagram 17 as shown by diagram 20,
with functors transforming ⃗mC,P,0 in ⃗mC,P,F and ⃗mC,Pc,0 in ⃗mC,Pc,F , respec-
tively.20
∆
⃗X
⃗C
Γ
⃗Y
t
gF
φ
gφ
FP
⃗m
⃗mC,P,0
⃗mC,P,F
hF
φ
hφ
⃗mC,Pc,0
⃗mC,Pc,F
FPc
(20)
20This is not shown in the diagram.
16
We can apply such a diagram to all musicians of the orchestra, getting
the colimit: orchestra = D −→conductor = colimit(D). We can deﬁne the
conductor-orchestra-listener via diagram 21 in terms of limits and colimits.
conductor = colim(D)
orchestra = D
666
listener = lim(D)
666
(21)
If we schematically represent the orchestral gestures as in equation 22, we can
deﬁne the limit as the listener, and the colimit as the conductor, see diagram
23. The choice of listener as a limit, even if considered as a metaphor, satisﬁes
the universal property because all the “listening and perception activities” can
be reduced to the listener, in contraposition to the sound-production activities.
The conductor plays the opposite role: all the “sound production” gestural
activities can be related to the conducting gesture, that is a pure gesture without
any direct sound production.
D =
Xλ
fλµ
- Xµ
Xκ
fκµ
-

fκλ
(22)
lim D
Z
!
6
Xλ
fλµ
-


πλ
Xµ
-
πµ
-
Xκ
fκµ
-

fκλ
colim D
Z
!
?
Xλ
fλµ
-
-
π′
λ
-
Xµ


π′
µ
Xκ
fκµ
-

fκλ
(23)
We can also specify the colimit diagram as shown by diagram 24, where
D is the orchestra, and the colimit is the conductor’s gesture ∆conductor →
17
⃗Xconductor.
Γ
g - ⃗Z
∆conductor
gconductor
-
∃!
-
⃗Xconductor
- D

∀
(24)
Let us now include the detail of (some) orchestral gestures. In diagram 25,
for simplicity we represent just one arrow from one orchestral gesture, gλ, to
the conductor; however, each orchestral gesture, it means each gi (gλ, gκ, gµ)
in the diagram 25, has an arrow to the conductor’s gesture gconductor, and also
to the g gesture.
Γ
g - ⃗Z
∆conductor
gconductor
-
∃!
-
⃗Xconductor
∆κ
gκ -
∀
6
⃗Xκ
∆λ
gλ
-

6
⃗Xλ

?
∆µ
?
gµ -
-
⃗Xµ
?
-
(25)
We will not deal here with a description of the universal properties of these limits
and colimits, preferring some more comments on their musical meaning and
implications. The gestures of the orchestral musicians can be (mathematically)
injected into the conductor’s ones.
Intuitively, we would say the opposite: the gestures of the conductor are the
initial source of movement for the orchestra, and the listener is the ﬁnal target
who sees the gestures, and listens to their sound result. This means that the
conductor’s movements are speciﬁed into the gestures of orchestral musicians,
and collected as a whole result by the listener. This would imply an inverse
order of the arrows in diagrams 22 and 23.
However, we can also say that the listener (emotionally) projects his or her
thought inside the sound and the gestures, so the arrows come from the listener
18
and reach the orchestral gestures. We may see the orchestral gestures as con-
tained “inside” the conductor’s ones. Let us think of the violinist’s, or pianist’s
gestures. They are much more complicated than the conducting ones. The com-
plicated gesture of each performer refers to, and injects into the simpler gesture,
i.e. the conducting one. This means that it projects into its simpliﬁcation. We
can interpret piano or violin gestures as something that can be envisaged into
the conducting gestures. Orchestral gestures are the development of the con-
ducting gestures. The listener may imagine the orchestral gestures—and the
shape of music—by observing the conducting gestures, even without listening
to the sound. In fact, the conductor’s gesture is the terminal element: there is
one and only one function going from it to the g : Γ →⃗Z having the property
that all orchestral gestures are injecting into it. There is a morphism of each
instrument to the conductor, and there is one and only one morphism of ges-
tures of the conductor in Z that makes the diagram commutative. We can talk
metaphorically about categorical adjunction between these two perspectives. A
mediation between the two poles would involve the deﬁnition of exchanges and
mutual feedback between performers, conductor, and listeners; the conductor is
also a listener and the listener can inﬂuence the performance through applause
or boos. An intermediate ﬁgure between who gives indication to make and who
listens to the sounds may be a conductor that changes the gesture according
to the performers’ outcome, or, better, a performer of an electronic instrument
that inﬂuences the sound production through the gesture itself (as a theremin
player), and adjusts the gesture according to the sound.
If we opt for the second description or for the intuitive one, both listener
and conductor are still at the opposite side, because:
• there is only one element (initial or terminal, depending on the chosen de-
scription) that collects all the orchestral gestures (for example, a “simpli-
ﬁed version” of orchestral gestures with collected analogous movements),
and there is one and only one morphism to the conductor’s motor gesture;
• there is only one element (again, terminal or initial, depending on the
chosen description) that reaches all the orchestral gestures (for example,
a more prominent sound result given by the most relevant musical struc-
tures, elements, phrases, timbres), and there is one and only one morphism
to the listener’s perceptive gesture.
Both listener and conductor are silent. The conductor is making active gestures,
the listener is interpreting the music heard via making similarities with his or
her background, past listening experiences, musical knowledge, and personal
sensibility. The conductor belongs to the motor world, while the listener to
the perceptive world.
If, through a software, the listener can manipulate an
electronic conductor, he or she is also a conductor, and if the conductor changes
his or her gestures depending on the listened sound, he or she is also a listener.
In each case, listener and conductor can only be compared with initial and
terminal objects in the world of the orchestral performance.21 In the case of a
21This happens if we already have a musical score. If, in such a description, we include the
19
piano improviser who is listening to his or her own music, listener’s, (unique)
performer’s, and composer’s roles all coincide.
Within the formalism of 2-category, we can generalize the description of lis-
tener →conductor →orchestra in terms of 2-colimits and 2-limits. In this case,
horizontal composition properties (among orchestral instruments, among diﬀer-
ent conductors, among diﬀerent listeners) and vertical composition properties
(among gestures leading to diﬀerent dynamics, articulations, tempo changes)
are still valid. This can be the topic of further research in itself.
3
Gestures from the composer to the conductor
We can schematize the gestures of the orchestral performance as a category, and
the gestures hidden in the score as another category. We can deﬁne a Perfor-
mance Functor connecting symbolic to physical gestures,22 and a Compositional
Functor, for the inverse movement, from the improvisation to the music tran-
scription/composition. In diagram 26, we consider diﬀerent skeleta, using labels
σ, φ to denote symbolic and physical gestures, respectively. Let us use the con-
cept of functor as morphism between categories. The Performance Functor (P.
F.) connects symbolic gestures to physical gestures, for piano and percussion.
∆σ
- ⃗Xσ
Γσ
?
- ⃗Yσ
?
∆φ
-
P.F.P
-
⃗Xφ
Γφ
?
-
P.F.P c
-
⃗Yφ
?
(26)
composer of the orchestral score, then the colimit role may be envisaged into the composing
activity. We may say that, in this extended description, the initial and ﬁnal points are both
in the mind: the mind of the composer, and the mind of the listener.
22The connection of single curves from (symbolic) systems of continuous curves to single
curves from other (physical) systems of continuous curves, their skeleta being the same, has
been investigated via branched graphs and branched world-sheets [33, 38].
20
4
Gestural similarity between music and visual
arts
The concept of gestural similarity can be used not only in music, but also
between music and visual arts.23
In art history, there are several examples
where visual artists got inspiration from music and vice versa: we can think
of Boris Mussorgsky, Luigi Russolo, and Morton Feldman, as few names.24 In
movies, particular scenes are often emphasized by musical gestures: we can
think of the correspondence between the frightening bow’s strikes and the knife
scene in Psycho.
Several studies highlight the correspondence between music and movement
[56], especially with the applications in the ﬁeld of soundtracks. In general, we
can say that “music is a gesture,” it is the “result of forces, impulses, experi-
ences... both from individual and general” [49].
Finally, we can discuss examples of soniﬁcation (mapping of non-sound data
into sound-data), and we can argue that they are more eﬀective when there are
gestural similarities: a rising shape may be described via a rising pitch sequence
[46], or a “staccato” musical sequence may be compared with a collection of
points on canvas. It is suﬃcient to see a drawing, for example, as the result
of a drawing gesture. Studies in the ﬁeld of psychology [56], crossmodal corre-
spondences [7, 43, 50], iconicity in linguistics [34], and audio-visual objects and
the theory of indispensable attributes [23] can support these ideas. Finally, we
can re-read examples of soniﬁcation [29] in light of gesture theory, and we can
compose new music [30].
We can use these ideas to investigate the connections between vocal gestures
in speaking and singing, and visual shapes, framing within category theory
classic perceptual experiments [41, 42, 52].
Further developments of such a research will also include perceptual exper-
iments to test the expected degree of similarity between music and visuals.
5
Conclusion
In this paper we contextualized in a categorical framework the analogies between
gestures of diﬀerent musicians, the gestural communication between conductor
and performers. Such a formalism can also be used to compare gestures in music
and in visual arts.
We proposed a ﬁrst mathematical deﬁnition of gestural similarity, to allow
comparisons between gestures belonging to diﬀerent spaces (such as piano’s
and percussion’s spaces) having similar characteristics, for example all realizing
23Category theory includes functors: so, we could provocatively talk about functorial aes-
thetics.
24In future developments of gestural similarity analysis, we may try to ﬁnd analogies between
a painting and the music inspired from it. This may be part of a more general approach to
artistic movements, ﬁnding the connections between music, visual art, and poetry within a
speciﬁc movement, in terms of basic “shared gestures.”
21
a forte sonority.
Further research can address the more general question of
the gesture classiﬁcation. We can use concepts from fuzzy logic, to quantify
the degree of similarity between two diﬀerent gestures. Moreover, fuzzy logic
can intervene in a more fundamental way, to connect symbolic and physical
gestures. In fact, analogously to what we do when we think of “the” circle (as
a Platonic idea) without being able to draw it, except in terms of a fuzzy circle
‘not perfectly circular,’ we can write a score and not be able to play exactly what
it is written. Each performance can be described in fuzzy terms: 0 for the score,
1 for the “perfect” and complete musical performance, and values within [0, 1]
to denote the performance in progress. Transition from symbolic to physical
gestures can be reformulated in terms of progressive action of a fuzzy function.
About category theory, further research may explore in detail the universal
properties of 2-limits and 2-colimits between conductor, orchestra and listener,
as well as theoretical extensions and artistic implications in the ﬁeld of ∞-
categories.
About the relations between gestural similarity and sound, future research
can also involve collaboration with scholars in the ﬁeld of neurosciences, more
precisely about interactions between symbolic gestures and words [4], spoken
language and arm gestures [16], gesture, sound, imitation in phoneme produc-
tion [13–15].
In conclusion, future studies can deepen and consolidate the connections
between physics, psychophysics, visual art, linguistics, and neuroscience, via a
common mathematical model.
6
Appendix: More details on the mathematical
theory of musical gestures
6.1
Homotopy and gestures
We will clarify the concept of homotopy and gestures used in this article. Let
us suppose we have two gestures, one for the piano, and the other for the violin,
with the same skeleton, see Figure 3. A forte gesture for the pianist is similar to
the forte for the violinist. The forte is transformed into piano via a diminuendo,
represented by the action of the functor FP in the 2-category (more precisely, we
have FPP acting on piano gestures, and FPV acting on violin gestures). There
is similarity between these gestures, because the articulations and the dynamics
are the same. However, if we choose a staccato gesture for the violin, there
is similarity only for the dynamic, but not for the articulation. The diagram
involving non-similarity is not commutative. All transformations involved are
homotopic, except the one required to pass from legato to staccato gestures.
We can argue the Heuristic Conjecture 6.1, connected with Deﬁnition 2.1—its
physical equivalent of Condition 2 of the Deﬁnition.
Conjecture 6.1. Heuristic conjecture. Two gestures, based on the same skele-
22
Figure 3: Comparison between forte gestures on the piano and on the violin, piano gestures
on both instruments, as well legato and non legato, as well transitions from forte to piano
(diminuendo), and from legato to staccato.
ton, are similar25 if and only if they can be connected via a transformation:
1. that homotopically transforms a gesture into the other,
2. and that also leads to similar changes in their respective acoustical spectra.
Homotopy is a necessary, but not suﬃcient, condition to get similar gestures.
Changes of loudness in orchestral playing lead also to changes in timbre, and
so to changes in the spectra. The tridimensional diagram of Figure 4 shows how
we can compare gestures and their acoustical results inside the same diagram.
In this way, the analysis of the spectrograms can be compared with the analysis
of the gestural curves in space and time. Moreover, we may deﬁne a degree of
similarity considering a parameter λ that is equal to 1 for two identical gestures,
and decreases to zero for gestures more and more diﬀerent.
6.2
The category ∇
We describe now the ∇category [38], used in Section 6.3.
The notation ∇
denotes here an internal category in Top, generalizing the unitary interval I =
[0, 1] in the two-dimension plane. To deﬁne ∇, let us think of the triangular
25Two gestures are formally called similar if they satisfy the conditions of Deﬁnition 2.1.
23
Figure 4: Tridimensional diagram that relates physical gestures with with their acoustical
results [30], in the case of the voice versus ﬂute, and vibrato versus non vibrato. This kind
of diagrams is not always commutative: it is not commutative, for example, when a sound
cannot be made by any human performer doing a musical gesture on an acoustic instrument.
24
region of space above the line x = y, consisting of points (x, y) with 0 ≤x < 1
and 0 ≤y < 1. The ∇category has:
1. as objects, the points belonging to the diagonal, i.e. their pairs of coordi-
nates that verify x = y, and
2. as morphisms, the points inside the upper triangle, i.e.
their pairs of
coordinates verifying x ≤y, the pairs (x, y) with x ≤y of real numbers
x, y ∈I = [0, 1].
The choice of the symbol ∇is due to such a triangular form. We can use the
symbol ∇to distinguish the set of points in the space X and the set of arrows
X∇having points in X, also indicated with ⃗X.26
6.3
Parametrized gestures
The concept of parametrized gestures is introduced to formally take into account
the inﬂuence of physical and physiological parameters on gestures.27 For each
choice α of parameters in a parameter space A, we have a corresponding gesture
g(α) in ∆⃗@X. Each choice of parameters implies a diﬀerent “embodiment” of
the given skeleton ∆of Figure 2. Moreover, we require that the mapping such
as g : A →∆⃗@X is continuous, and we deﬁne the set of these A-parametrized
curves28 as ∆⃗@AX. Figure 5 shows two slightly diﬀerent gestures, corresponding
to a slightly diﬀerent choice of parameters α1 and α2. More formally, let ∇be
the topological category of curve parameters, and A a topological category. For
every choice of parameters, we can deﬁne a curve with values in the topological
category X, given by q : A →∇@X. This is equivalent to q : A × ∇→X. This
means that, for α ∈A, we have a curve C(α) : ∇→X. Let us consider the unit
interval I = [0, 1] and a topological category A. Going along I with a parameter
t ranging from 0 to 1, we can build a parametric curve having s as parameter
(for example: s for the variable of (sin(s), cos(s))). In the rectangle A × I, we
have a set of values of s ranging from 0 to 1 for each choice of parameter α ∈A.
A straight line in A × I is not yet a skeleton: it can instead constitute one of
26Curves in ⃗X are mapped into points of X, for example with functions taking the tail and
the head of an arrow. We can interpret these functions as directed graphs of the set of arrows
and points. In fact, we indicate as ⃗X a directed graph, identiﬁed by the curves c : ∇→X,
whose the head and tail functions, projecting to X the ﬁnal and initial points of continuous
curves in ⃗X. This action of projecting a curve into points can be generalized not only for ﬁnal
and initial points, but also for every other point belonging to the curve.
27Parametrized gestures have been used to mathematically describe the mechanism of voice
in singing [37, Chapter 37]. The dimension of the hand of the pianist, the anatomy of the
vocal tract for the singer, and the values of diaphragm pressure and position of the larynx are
examples of parameter choices.
28We can deﬁne an A-parametrized gesture as a continuous function from the Cartesian
product of the parameter space ∇with the category A, with values in the topological space
X, that is, A × ∇→X. According to what is called the currying theorem in informatics, for
a category C we have C(X × Y, Z) ˜→C(X, ZY ), where ZY are the curves from Y to Z, and
we can write that q : A × ∇→X ∼q : A →∇@X. As described in [38], an A-addressed
gesture with skeleton digraph ∆and body X is a digraph morphism g : ∆→A@ ⃗X into the
spatial digraph of A@ ⃗X.
25
g(↵1)
g(↵2)
pitch
tip space
onset
position
Figure 5: Two slightly diﬀerent parametrized gestures, g(α1) and g(α2), corresponding to a
bit diﬀerent choice of parameters α1 and α2. The tip space is the space of the positions of a
ﬁnger’s tip of the hand of the pianist. A tip space indicated as position-onset-pitch has been
used in [36].
its parts. These values can be mapped into a curve in the topological space X,
exactly as it happens in the deﬁnition of gesture, from a skeleton of a digraph
to a curve (system of curves) in a topological space.
A morphism f : g →h of two addressed gestures g : Γ →A@ ⃗X and h :
∆→B@⃗Y , is a triple f = (t : Γ →∆, a : B →A, m : X →Y ), consisting
of a digraph morphism t, an address change a, and a continuous functor of
topological categories m, such that Γ@aY ◦Γ@Am(g) = t@BY (h). Finally, we
have that an A-addressed gesture with skeleton digraph Γ and body X is a
digraph morphism g : Γ →A@ ⃗X, and we denote this set of gestures by Γ@A ⃗X.
We can ﬁnally write the relations of equations 27, 28, and 29 [38].
Γ@aX : Γ@A ⃗X →Γ@B ⃗X
(27)
Γ@Am : Γ@A ⃗X →Γ@A⃗Y
(28)
t@AX : Γ@A ⃗X →∆@A ⃗X.
(29)
6.3.1
Parametrized hypergestures
The concept of parametrization can also be applied to hypergestures. Let us
indicate with ∆@X the set of all the curves from ∆to X.
Let g be a B-
parametrized gesture, going from the skeleton ∆to the system of curves in
the space XB.
Brieﬂy, g ∈∆⃗@BX, where we consider the new set having
the structure of topological space. In such a space, the gesture g is a point.
As known, the morphisms in this new space, connecting points (gestures), are
hypergestures. If we have a skeleton Γ, mapped via the hypergesture l into
a system of A-parametrized curves connecting points g and h (both gestures
g, h ∈∆⃗@BX), we say that l is an A-parametrized hypergesture, and we can
write l ∈Γ@A(∆⃗@BX). If also this space has the structure of a topological
space, we can write Γ⃗@A(∆⃗@BX).
26
6.4
Musical forces
In the Introduction, we cited world-sheets. They can be framed in the topic
of musical forces that shape their surface. World-sheets are obtained from the
minimization of the action for a Lagrangian including complex time29 [33, 37].
The shape of the world-sheet is determined by an (artistic) potential, a force
ﬁeld.30
Such a surface creates a tight relation between symbolic and physi-
cal gesture, representing “artistic” forces that transform thought into artistic
expression.
The concept of force is a classic metaphor in musical creativity
[5, 24, 39, 40, 47]. The concept of such a potential is used in numerical cal-
culations, and used to mean the characteristic combination of parameters that
distinguish a gesture from another [38] but it has not been precisely deﬁned
yet. The role of the force ﬁeld may be related to the non-trivial conversion of
the score’s mental reality to the performance’s physical reality. This process
depends upon several elements such as technical diﬃculties, training, technical
ability/skills of the performer, and expressivity of the piece.
Disclosure statement
The author has no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Guerino Mazzola for the fruitful discussions about the relations
between art and science in the framework of category theory. I am also grateful
to Peter beim Graben, for the reading of my manuscript, and for the insightful
suggestions between physics, mathematics and semiotics. Thank you to Luca
Nobile for reading and suggesting related studies in the ﬁeld of crossmodal
correspondences and neuroscience.
I also would like to give a special thank
to Giuseppe Metere for the mathematical insights. Finally, I am grateful to
Marco Betta for musical advice, to Jason Yust for careful work as editor, and
to Thomas Fiore for his careful corrections to the galley proofs. I also thank
the referees.
References
[1] Alunni, Charles. 2004. Penser par le diagramme—de Gilles Deleuze `a Gilles
Chˆatelet, chap. Diagrammes et Cat´egories comme prol´egom`enes `a la ques-
29In [37] the complex time is introduced to extend the formalism of Physics to the mental
reality of the score, where music ﬂows in the imaginary time. The reality of the physical music
performance ﬂows in the real time [44].
30The question of such an artistic potential is currently under research. It has an anal-
ogy at the level of notes with the performance operators [35, 40], both mathematically and
conceptually.
27
tion : Qu’est-ce que s’orienter diagrammatiquement dans la pens´ee ? Presse
Universitaire de Vincennes.
[2] Antoniadis, Pavlos, and Fr´ed´eric Bevilacqua. 2016. “Processing of sym-
bolic music notation via multimodal performance data:
Brian Ferney-
hough’s Lemma-Icon-Epigram for solo piano, phase 1.” Proceedings of
TENOR 2016
http://tenor2016.tenor-conference.org/papers/18_
Antoniadis_tenor2016.pdf.
[3] Bachrat´a, Petra. 2011. “Mod`eles musicaux interactifs bas´es sur le geste
pour l’analyse et la composition de musique mixte.” Revue Francophone
d’Informatique Musicale, Maison des Science de l’Homme, Paris Nord (1).
http://revues.mshparisnord.org/rfim/index.php?id=123.
[4] Barbieri, Buonocore Antonio Dalla Volta Riccardo, Filippo, and Maurizio
Gentilucci. 2009. “How symbolic gestures and words interact with each
other.” Brain Lang 110 (1).
[5] beim Graben, Peter, and Reinhard Blutner. 2016. “Toward a Gauge Theory
of Musical Forces.” In Proceedings of the Quantum Interaction Conference
2016, Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
[6] beim Graben, Peter, and Roland Potthast. 2009.
“Inverse problems in
dynamic cognitive modeling.” Chaos 19 (1): 015103.
[7] Berlin, Brent. 2006. “The First Congress of Ethnozoological Nomencla-
ture.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 12 (s1): S23–S44.
[8] Bevilacqua, Fr´ed´eric, Norbert Schell, Nicolas Rasamimanana, Bruno Zam-
borlin, and Fabrice Gu´edy. 2011. Musical Robots and Interactive Multi-
modal Systems, chap. Online Gesture Analysis and Control of Audio Pro-
cessing, 127–142. Springer-Verlag, Basel.
[9] Bevilacqua, Fr´ed´eric, Bruno Zamborlin, Anthony Sypniewski, Norbert
Schnell, Fabrice Gu´edy, and Nicolas Rasamimanana. 2009. “Continuous
Realtime Gesture Following and Recognition.” In Gesture in Embodied
Communication and Human-Computer Interaction, edited by Stefan Kopp
and Ipke Wachsmuth, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer.
[10] Buteau, Chantal, and Guerino Mazzola. 2000. “From Contour Similarity
to Motivic Topology.” Musicae Scientiae VI (2).
[11] Cont, Arshia, Shlomo Dubnov, and G´erard Assayag. 2011. “On the infor-
mation geometry of audio streams with applications to similarity comput-
ing.” Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE Transactions on 4:
837–846.
[12] Fran¸coise, Jules, Baptiste Caramiaux, and Fr´ed´eric Bevilacqua. 2012. “A
Hierarchical Approach for the Design of Gesture to Sound Mappings.” In
Proceedings of the 9th Sound and Music Conference (SMC), Copenhagen.
28
[13] Gentilucci, Dalla Volta Riccardo, Maurizio, and Claudia Gianelli. 2008.
“When the hand speak.” The Journal of Physiology 102: 21–30.
[14] Gentilucci, Maurizio, and Paolo Bernardis. 2006. “Speech and gesture share
the same communication system.” Neurospychologia 44 (178-190).
[15] Gentilucci, Maurizio, and Paolo Bernardis. 2007.
“Imitation during
phoneme production.” Neuropsychologia 45 (3): 608–615.
[16] Gentilucci, Maurizio, and Riccardo Dalla Volta. 2008. “Spoken language
and arm gesture are controlled by the same motor control system.” The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 61 (6): 944–957.
[17] Godøy, Rolf, and Marc Leman, eds. 2009. Musical Gestures: Sound, Move-
ment and Meaning. Routledge, New York.
[18] Henrotte, Gayle. 1992. “Music and Gesture: A Semiotic Inquiry.” American
Journal of Semiotics 9 (4): 103–113.
[19] Iazzetta, Fernando. 2000. Trends in Gestural Control of Music, chap. Mean-
ing in Musical Gesture. Ircam, Centre Pompidou.
[20] Joyal, Andr´e. 2008. “The theory of quasi-categories and its applications.”
Centre de Recerca Matematica Barcelona 45, II. http://mat.uab.cat/
~kock/crm/hocat/advanced-course/Quadern45-2.pdf.
[21] Knees, Peter, and Markus Schedl. 2016. Music Similarity and Retrieval.
Springer, Heidelberg.
[22] Kosko, Bart. 1994.
Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic.
Hyperion, Westport.
[23] Kubovy, Michael, and Michael Schutz. 2010. “Audio-visual objects.” Re-
view of Philosophy and Psychology 1 (1): 41–61.
[24] Larson, Steve. 2012. Musical Forces. Musical Meaning and Interpretation.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
[25] Lawvere, William, and Stephen Schanuel. 2009. Conceptual Mathematics.
A ﬁrst introduction to categories. Cambridge University Press.
[26] Leinster, Tom. 1998. “Basic Bicategories.” ArXiV
https://arxiv.org/
pdf/math/9810017v1.pdf.
[27] Lurie, Jacob. 2008. “What is an ∞-Category?.” Notices of the AMS 55
(8): 949–950.
[28] Mac Lane, Saunders. 1971.
Categories for the Working Mathematician.
Springer, Heidelberg.
29
[29] Mannone, Maria. 2011.
Dalla Musica all’Immagine, dall’Immagine alla
Musica. Relazioni matematiche fra composizione musicale e arte ﬁgurativa
(From Music to Images, from Images to Music. Mathematical relations
between musical composition and ﬁgurative art). Palermo: Edizioni Com-
postampa.
[30] Mannone, Maria. 2017. “Musical Gestures between Scores and Acoustics: A
Creative Application to Orchestra.” Ph.D. thesis, University of Minnesota.
[31] Mannone, Maria, and Giuseppe Compagno. 2014. “Characterization of the
degree of Musical non-Markovianity.” ArXiV
http://arxiv.org/pdf/
1306.0229v2.pdf.
[32] Mannone, Maria, Rosario Lo Franco, and Giuseppe Compagno. 2013.
“Comparison of non-Markovianity criteria in a qubit system under random
external ﬁelds.” Physica Scripta T153: 014047.
[33] Mannone, Maria, and Guerino Mazzola. 2015. “Hypergestures in Complex
Time: Creative Performance Between Symbolic and Physical Reality.” In
Proceedings of the MCM 2015 Conference, edited by T. Collins et al., 137–
148. Springer, Heidelberg.
[34] Mayerthaler, Willi. 1987.
“System-independent morphological natural-
ness.” In Leitmotifs in Natural Morphology, Vol. 10 of Studies in Language
Companion Series edited by W. U. Dressler, W. Mayerthaler, O. Panagl,
and W. U. Wurzel, 25–58. Benjamins.
[35] Mazzola, Guerino. 2011. Musical Performance. Computational Music Sci-
ence. Springer, Heidelberg.
[36] Mazzola, Guerino, and Moreno Andreatta. 2007. “Diagrams, Gestures and
Formulae in Music.” Journal of Mathematics and Music 1 (1): 23–46.
[37] Mazzola, Guerino, Ren´e Guitart, Jocelyn Ho, Alex Lubet, Maria Mannone,
Matt Rahaim, and Florian Thalmann. To appear 2018. The Topos of Music
III: Gestures. Computational Music Science. Springer, Heidelberg.
[38] Mazzola, Guerino, and Maria Mannone. 2016.
“Global Functorial Hy-
pergestures over General Skeleta for Musical Performance.” Journal of
Mathematics and Music
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17459737.2016.
1195456.
[39] Mazzola, Guerino, Joomi Park, and Florian Thalmann. 2011. Musical Cre-
ativity. Computational Music Science. Springer, Heidelberg.
[40] Mazzola, Guerino et al. 2002. The Topos of Music: Geometric Logic of
Concepts, Theory, and Performance. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel.
30
[41] Nobile, Luca. 2013. Iconicity in Language and Literature 10 : Semblance
and Signiﬁcation, chap. Words in the mirror: Analysing the sensorimotor
interface between phonetics and semantics in Italian, 101–131. Amster-
dam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
[42] Nobile, Luca. 2015. “Phonemes as images: An experimental inquiry into
shape-sound symbolism applied to the distinctive features of French.” In
Iconicity: East meets West, edited by Herlofsky William Shinohara Kazuko
Hiraga, Masako and Kimi Akita, 71–91.
[43] Ohala, John. 1982. “The voice of dominance.” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 72 (S66).
[44] Primas, Hans. 2007.
“Non-Boolean descriptions for mind-matter prob-
lems.” Mind and Matter 5 (1): 7–44.
[45] Rinman, Marie-Louise, Anders Friberg, Ivar Kjellmo, Antonio Camurri,
Damien Cirotteau, Soﬁa Dahl, Barbara Mazzarino, Bendik Bendikesen,
and Hugh McCarthy. 2003.
“EPS - An Interactive Collaborative Game
Using Non-Verbal Communication.” In Proceedings of the Stockholm Music
Acoustics Conference, Stockholm.
[46] Roﬄer, Suzanne, and Robert Butler. 1968.
“Factors that inﬂuence the
localization of sound in the vertical plane.” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 43: 1255–1259.
[47] Schoenberg, A. 1983 edition. Theory of Harmony. University of California
Press.
[48] Schutz, Michael, and Scott Lipscomb. 2007. “Hearing gestures, seeing mu-
sic: Vision inﬂuences perceived tone duration.” Perception 36: 888–897.
[49] Sessions, Roger, and Edward T. Cone. 1979. Roger Sessions on Music,
Collected Essays. Princeton Legacy Library.
[50] Spence, Charles. 2011. “Crossmodal correspondences: A tutorial review.”
Attention, Perception and Psychophysics 73: 971–995.
[51] Spivak, David. 2013. Category Theory for Scientists. MIT.
[52] Uznadze, Dimitri. 1924. “Ein experimenteller Beitrag zum Problem der
psychologischen Grundlagen der Namengebung (An experimental contri-
bution to the problem of the psychological foundations of naming).” Psy-
chologische Forschung 5 (1-2): 24–43.
[53] Visi, Federico, Rodrigo Schramm, and Eduardo Miranda. 2014. “Gesture in
performance with traditional musical instruments and electronics: Use of
embodied music cognition and multimodal motion capture to design gestu-
ral mapping strategies.” In Moco ’14: proceedings of the 2014 international
workshop on movement and computing, Paris.
31
[54] Wieland, Renate, and J¨urgen Uhde. 2002. Forschendes ¨Uben. Wege instru-
mentalen Lernens. ¨Uber den Interpreten und den K¨orper als Instrument
der Musik. B¨arenreiter, Neum¨unster.
[55] Winter, Michael. 2004. “Goguen Categories.” Journal on Relational Meth-
ods in Computer Science 1: 339–357.
[56] Zbikowski, Lawrence. 2002. Conceptualizing Music. AMS Studies in Music.
Oxford University Press.
[57] Zwiebach, Barton. 2004.
A First Course in String Theory.
Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
32
