Dorabella Cipher as Musical Inspiration
Bradley Hauer, Colin Choi, Abram Hindle, Scott Smallwood, Grzegorz Kondrak
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
{bmhauer,cechoi,hindle1,ssmallwo,gkondrak}@ualberta.ca
Abstract
The Dorabella cipher is an encrypted note writ-
ten by English composer Edward Elgar, which
has defied decipherment attempts for more than
a century. While most proposed solutions are
English texts, we investigate the hypothesis that
Dorabella represents enciphered music. We
weigh the evidence for and against the hypoth-
esis, devise a simplified music notation, and
attempt to reconstruct a melody from the ci-
pher. Our tools are n-gram models of music
which we validate on existing music corpora
enciphered using monoalphabetic substitution.
By applying our methods to Dorabella, we pro-
duce a decipherment with musical qualities,
which is then transformed via artful composi-
tion into a listenable melody. Far from arguing
that the end result represents the only true solu-
tion, we instead frame the process of decipher-
ment as part of the composition process.
1
Introduction
The Dorabella cipher (henceforth, simply Dora-
bella) is an encrypted note sent by Edward El-
gar, the composer of the “Enigma Variations”, to
his friend Dora Penny in 1897 (Santa and Santa,
2010). While many cryptography researchers have
assumed that the underlying message is an English
text, it has also been hypothesized that it may en-
code music, since Elgar was a composer and a
music teacher. This raises several interesting ques-
tions. Is it possible to find evidence for or against
the music hypothesis? What kind of music notation
could be devised with only two dozen possible dis-
tinct symbols? How would a musical decipherment
compare to the proposed textual decipherments?
In this paper, we attempt to answer these ques-
tions in a principled manner, by using n-gram lan-
guage models derived from collections of tran-
scribed music. However, we also approach musical
decipherment as a creative process. We demon-
Figure 1: The Dorabella Cipher.
strate this technique on Dorabella, producing a de-
cipherment that has musical qualities, transformed
via artful composition into a listenable melody.
While prior work typically pursues a single correct
decipherment, we instead adopt a creative approach
of converting ciphers into music, which might lead
to composition of new works.
This paper has the following structure: In Sec-
tion 2 we provide background on n-grams, perplex-
ity and monoalphabetic substitution ciphers. In
Section 3, we discuss prior work. In Section 4,
we describe our methodology, including datasets
for training language models. In Section 5, we
describe our results on encrypted melody samples.
In Section 6, our highest-scoring decipherment of
Dorabella as a melody is used as inspiration to
compose a new work.
2
Background
Substitution ciphers, their properties, and crypt-
analysis techniques have been studied for centuries
(Singh, 2011). A monoalphabetic substitution ci-
pher enciphers a plaintext by applying a 1-to-1
mapping of symbols to each character token, pro-
ducing a ciphertext which has a length equal to
the length of the plaintext. The symbol mapping
function is called the key. Given the key, revers-
ing the encipherment process and recovering the
plaintext is trivial: simply apply the inverse of the
key to each ciphertext symbol. The process of re-
covering the plaintext when the key is not given
is called decipherment. Common measures of the
arXiv:2509.17950v1  [cs.CL]  22 Sep 2025
A2 E3 B2 A3 A1 C2 G1 A3 D1 H2 B3 F2 F1 B1 F2 C3 F2 F2 C2 E3 E3 F2 B1 H1 H2 H1 C1 B3 F3
G1 F2 G1 C2 H1 A3 D1 D2 A3 B2 F2 F2 B2 C2 C1 F1 G1 F2 B3 F2 C2 G2 F3 F1 B1 H1 D1 D1 H1 B3 F3
B2 F3 C2 G2 F3 B2 B1 G2 G3 C1 F3 B2 F2 C2 G2 F1 F3 C1 A3 E3 C1 F3 C2 A3 B1 H1 A3
Figure 2: Our transcription of Dorabella which encodes the orientation and semicircle count of each symbol.
decipherment success are: (1) decipherment accu-
racy, which is the percentage of correctly recovered
symbols in the ciphertext; and (2) key accuracy,
which is the percentage of correctly mapped sym-
bols in the cipher alphabet. Decipherment accuracy
is typically higher than key accuracy, because more
frequent symbols are more likely to be deciphered
correctly.
Computational decipherment methods are based
on heuristic search algorithms guided by statistical
n-gram language models (Nuhn et al., 2013; Hauer
et al., 2014). An n-gram language model estimates
the probability of a token in a sequence based on
the previous n−1 tokens. If the token is near the
beginning of the string, a special start token is used
in place of the missing prior tokens. Through re-
peated applications of this model, the probability
of the entire sequence can be estimated. Perplexity
is a function of probability, which measures the
ability of a statistical model to predict a particu-
lar sequence. Lower perplexity indicates that the
model is “less surprised” by the data, and so is
said to be a better fit. Tokens may be characters
or words in natural language, or symbols used in
music notation. For compatibility with prior work
which models sequences of characters in natural
language, we refer to a language model over music
notation as a character language model.
3
Prior Work
This section describes prior works that use n-gram
models for composition, and prior attempts to solve
the Dorabella cipher.
3.1
N-Gram models for composition
N-gram models have been applied to study the
structure of music (Manzara et al., 1992) and to
compose music. N-gram models in music research
and composition range from serial notes, to chords,
to pitch and duration pairs (Lo and Lucas, 2006;
Wołkowicz et al., 2008), and more complicated
structures (McCormack, 1996).
Manzara et al. (1992) investigate the entropy of
music from an n-gram perspective. They test how
well people can guess the next note, and compare
that to n-gram models of Bach’s four part Chorale.
They report that people outperform n-gram mod-
els, and that both people and n-gram models have
relatively consistent performance.
McCormack (1996) employs n-grams and sim-
ilar Bayesian structures to compose music. His
focus was on Markov chains, which are related
to n-gram language models and perplexity estima-
tions.
Lo and Lucas (2006) combine genetic algorithms
and n-gram language models to evolve musical se-
quences. The n-gram models act as fitness func-
tions to guide the creation of musical sequences
that have lower perplexity given an n-gram lan-
guage model. In addition, they use their models to
identify composers.
Wołkowicz et al. (2008) also use n-grams to iden-
tify composers. They process MIDI files and pro-
duce n-grams of pitch and duration tuples. They
achieve up to 84% accuracy at identifying com-
posers using a large corpus of 10000 notes of each
composer’s work, and about 54% accuracy when
using only 100 notes, which is at a similar level of
accuracy as Lo and Lucas (2006).
3.2
Dorabella Cipher
The earliest computational attempt at solving the
Dorabella Cipher that we are aware of is that of
Sams (1970). He applies statistical analysis based
on character frequencies and brute force cryptanal-
ysis. The work considers the assumptions that the
cipher encrypts English text which may be partly
phoneticized, is not strictly monoalphabetic, and
may involve multiple layers of encryption. The
author ultimately proposes the following solution
to the cipher:
“Larks! It’s chaotic, but a cloak
obscures my new letters, a, b. I own the dark makes
E. E. sigh when you are too long gone.”
Santa and Santa (2010) provide an overview
of Elgar’s work on cryptography, focusing on the
“enigma” that he implied to be hidden within his
musical piece Variations on a Theme. They note
the connections Elgar made between that piece and
Dorabella, neither of which has been conclusively
solved. despite this and other “hints” from Elgar.
In particular, they raise the possibility of mathemat-
ical concepts being used in Dorabella, specifically
the constant π, as well as the encoding of scale-
degrees with numerical values.
As well-known techniques, such as frequency
analysis, have not proven effective on Dorabella,
Schmeh (2018) proposes to consider less common
techniques. These include vowel detection and a
frequency-based consonant identification method.
The author applies these techniques both to Dora-
bella, and on a control plaintext. He does not pro-
pose a solution to Dorabella, but demonstrates that
these methods can distinguish between vowels and
consonants in the control cipher. With the same
techniques, he attempts to identify some Dorabella
symbols as vowels or consonants. He also notes
that certain statistical properties of Dorabella are
consistent with English text.
Packwood (2020) proposes a natural language
solution to Dorabella. The method is complex, and
involves breaking the cipher into discrete blocks,
among which patterns can be observed, and an elab-
orate system of transposition. The author further
speculates that the cipher also conceals a musical
composition, but makes no attempt at a musical
decipherment.
Hauer et al. (2021) experiment with several
monoalphabetic substitution cipher solvers to de-
cipher music. They rely on a corpus of Bach and
Elgar MIDI files, and try to decipher synthetic mu-
sic ciphers using a pitch/duration language model,
but the results are quite low compared to textual
ciphers. They conclude that it is unlikely that Dora-
bella represents music encoded using an alphabet
of pitch and duration.
4
Methodology
In this section, we describe our methodology, in-
cluding datasets for training language models.
4.1
Transcribing Dorabella
The first step is to render Dorabella into a machine-
readable form. In order to establish such a tran-
scription, we compared five different manual tran-
scriptions attempts, including Schmeh (2018), Hart-
meier (2017), Pelling (2012), as well as transcrip-
tions by two of the authors of this paper. A majority
consensus transcription is shown in Figure 2. It
consists of 87 tokens made of an uppercase letter
encoding the symbol orientation, followed by the
number of semicircles. There are 8 possible ori-
entations (A-H), while the number of semicircles
ranges from 1 to 3.
4.2
Pitch-Duration Dataset and Encoding
We use the music dataset created by Hauer et al.
(2021). The dataset was created from MIDI files,
a form of digitally representing musical compo-
sition which encodes pitch, pitch amplitude, and
duration over a timeline, usually including metric
and tempo information. The files represent music
from both Elgar and Bach. The Elgar data consists
of 29 files containing a total of 1.2M notes, while
the Bach data consists of 295 files containing 3.7M
notes. We include the Bach data due to the rela-
tively small size of the Elgar corpus; this increases
the total size of our data by a factor of four. Each
dataset is divided into training and testing splits.
This is done to ensure that experimental results are
generalizable to data not used to provide statistical
information for the models used by the decipher-
ment algorithms. The test set is further divided into
87-note sequences, the same length as Dorabella.
Hauer et al. (2021) assume that enciphered mu-
sic must, before encipherment, be represented in
some serial, symbolic notation. To this end, they
transpose all music into the key of C major, and
use only one octave. All symbols except notes (e.g.
rests) are removed. All notes are normalized to one
of three durations: quarter note, shorter than a quar-
ter note, or longer than a quarter note. Further, all
notes were normalized to one of the eight most fre-
quent notes: A, B, C, D, E, F, F♯, and G. Thus, just
as each Dorabella cipher symbol has one of three
semicircle counts and one of eight orientations, giv-
ing a theoretical vocabulary of 24 symbols, the
encoding assigns to each symbol one of three du-
rations and one of eight notes, yielding 24 distinct
symbols. While there is much more information
encoded in musical notation, we are constrained
by the 24-symbol alphabet of the cipher. For ex-
ample, if we assumed that some cipher symbols
represent rests, we would need to further reduce
the already limited range of notes that the cipher
can represent. While this encoding was designed to
match the form of the Dorabella cipher, we present
a more principled approach in Section 4.4.
4.3
English Dataset
To assess the ability of our statistical models to
fit music, we induce models of both music and
English, and compare the fitness of our modelling
method on different types of data. We use the
English language dataset of Hauer et al. (2021),
which is a subset of the letters of Jane Austen. This
corpus was deemed appropriate since it consists
of written epistolary correspondences, which is
the hypothesized domain of Dorabella. The text
was first processed to remove all non-alphabetic
characters, including white space. 300 excerpts
from the corpus were selected at random, each
consisting of a sequence of 87 characters. We use
this set of 300 texts for the perplexity measurement
experiment described in Section 5.
4.4
Melody Dataset
We experiment with the CANTUS corpus of folk
music (Lacoste, 2012). We conjecture that Elgar
would be more likely to create something that re-
flected contemporary styles of folk music rather
than the more complex, and often more chromat-
ically adventurous music of his own. This leads
us to consider musical databases that are limited
to a single line of music, as well as to simplify the
issues around key signature, meter, rhythm, and
other factors. Our melody corpus reduces all exam-
ples to the common key of C. We also chose to not
attempt to model rhythms, dynamics, articulations,
and other components, looking mainly at pitch, and
assuming 4/4 meter. There are other composition
decisions which could have been made. Given the
extremely small set of symbols, and the short length
of the cipher, we necessarily had to make some sim-
plifying assumptions, and we did so based on our
intuitions regarding what setting would produce
the most natural-sounding composition.
Our melody dataset is from the CANTUS
Database of chants and melodies (Lacoste, 2012;
Helsen and Lacoste, 2011), an online searchable
database that encodes melodies as sequences of
pitches without including their durations.1 Table
1 shows the sources of melodies in the CANTUS
dataset and their average length. The melodies in
CANTUS are monophonic, and most include notes
in the range of F3 to D6. Since there are only 17
distinct notes in our subset of CANTUS, we inter-
polate the range from A3 to E6 to yield 24 symbols
used to decipher Dorabella: A3, B♭3, B3, F3, G3,
A4, B♭4, B4, C4, D4, E4, F4, G4, A5, B♭5, B5, C5,
D5, E5, F5, G5, C6, D6, E6. Because of the smaller
alphabet and vocabulary of the melody dataset, we
expect it to have lower perplexity, which should
lead to better results than with the dataset described
in Section 4.2.
1An example melody http://cantusindex.org/
melody/msch001
Name
Dataset
Melodies
Length
Gloria
mbos
102
8.9
Kyrie
mmel
226
8.7
Agnus Dei
mscb
267
8.9
Alleluia
msch
409
34.9
Hymn
msta
344
49.4
Sanctus
mtha
228
9.0
All
1576
Table 1: Melody datasets extracted from CANTUS (La-
coste, 2012; Helsen and Lacoste, 2011)
Our training corpus is created by randomly sam-
pling 467 melodies without replacement.
Our
datasets, code, and compositions are released at:
https://zenodo.org/record/4764819
4.5
Decipherment
As our decipherment method for enciphered mu-
sic, we use the solver of Norvig (2009), which
we refer to as HILLCLIMBC.2 We selected it for
its effectiveness on deciphering monoalphabetic
substitution ciphers, even when word boundaries
are not preserved in the cipher. This is important,
as our encoding of music has no analogy to word
boundaries, and no such boundaries are indicated
in Dorabella. The solver maximizes the probabil-
ity of the decipherment as estimated by a trigram
character language model. Starting from a random
initial key, HILLCLIMBC applies a hill climbing al-
gorithm as a heuristic search strategy. At each step,
many successor keys are generated by applying per-
mutations to the current key; whichever successor
gives the greatest increase in probability (equiva-
lently, the greatest decrease in perplexity) becomes
the key in the next iteration. We run the algorithm
for 4000 iterations, with 90 random restarts. The
decipherment with the lowest perplexity across all
iterations is returned.
5
Decipherment Results
Table 2 shows the decipherment results on a test set
of 300 distinct melody samples, sampled without
replacement from the corresponding training set.
Clearly, the results on the melody dataset are much
better than those on the pitch/duration datasets,
which in turn are better for Bach than for Elgar.
The mean key accuracy across all examples in the
melody dataset is 50%, that is, half of the key sym-
bols are correct. Approximately half of ciphers
2http://norvig.com/ngrams
Source
Key Acc
Dec Acc
pitch/duration (Elgar)
7.0%
12.0%
pitch/duration (Bach)
26.5%
32.0%
melody (CANTUS)
50.0%
54.5%
Table 2: HILLCLIMBC results on music ciphers of
length 20,000.
were deciphered with 70% decipherment accuracy
or higher, and nearly one third of ciphers were de-
ciphered entirely correctly. This suggests that our
approach is effective for melody decipherment.
One reason for the lower accuracy on the
pitch/duration datasets may be their quality. The
original MIDI files were created by multiple au-
thors, leading to a low consistency in musical tran-
scription. In addition, the files are polyphonic; even
for piano music, they often have separate chan-
nels for each hand. On the other hand, our melody
dataset is monophonic and consistently transcribed.
Dataset
Average Perplexity
English (Austen)
16.2
pitch/duration (Elgar)
24.4
pitch/duration (Bach)
24.5
melody (CANTUS)
5.6
Table 3: Average perplexity using a trigram character
language model.
Another possible explanation for the divergent
performance could be the encoding. Table 3 shows
the perplexity of different datasets. We used tri-
gram language character models with modified
Kneser-Ney smoothing and discounts. The rela-
tively high perplexity values of the pitch/duration
datasets suggests that the pitch-only encoding
may be better suited to modelling music than the
pitch/duration encoding. Indeed, based on these re-
sults, predicting the next note of a melody is easier
than than predicting the next English character in a
sentence.
6
Composition from Decipherment
In this section we apply our algorithm to the Dora-
bella cipher, and take the resulting melody as a
basis for a composition. In particular, we manually
analyze the output for musical content, and modify
it according to subjective musical tastes. This cre-
ative process is guided by the familiarity with the
composer’s style, and is not itself replicable.
E6 B5 A4 B4 B3 F4 D6 B4 E5 F5 G5 G4 C4 C5 G4 A5 G4 G4 F4 B5 B5 G4 C5 D5 F5 D5
B♭4 G5 D4 D6 G4 D6 F4 D5 B4 E5 C6 B4 A4 G4 G4 A4 F4 B♭4 C4 D6 G4 G5 G4 F4 E4
D4 C4 C5 D5 E5 E5 D5 G5 D4 A4 D4 F4 E4 D4 A4 C5 E4 A3 B♭4 D4 A4 G4 F4 E4 C4 D4
B♭4 B4 B5 B♭4 D4 F4 B4 C5 D5 B4
Figure 3: A decipherment of Dorabella as melody.
Figure 3 shows our highest-scoring decipher-
ment of Dorabella assuming 4/4 time. Figure 4 de-
picts its musical transcription, which was obtained
by applying HILLCLIMBC with a language model
derived from the melody dataset (467 samples).
This decipherment attempt has some interesting
musical features. The notes in Figure 4 seem at
times to imply logical harmonic progressions. In
the second half, there are even moments of motivic
repetition, albeit not exact, which evoke a musical
composition.
& 44
œ œ
œ œ
œ œ
œ
œ œ œ œ
œ œ
œ œ
œ
œ œ œ
œ œ
œ œ œ œ œ œb œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
&
9
œ œ œ œ œ
œ œ œ œ œ œ œb
œ
œ
œ
œ
œ œ œ œ œ
œ œ œ œ œ œ
œ œ œ œ œ
&
17
œ œ œ œ œ
œb œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œb
œn
œ
œ œ œ œ œ œ œ Œ
Figure 4: Note output from Dorabella
After manual analysis we decided to realign the
notes from the 4/4 meter to the 3/4 meter, as this
appears to fit better the contours and implied har-
monic progression. Surprisingly, the melody seems
to be match two 16-bar 3/4 phrases, except for a
premature end in the second phrase. Considering
that we only use quarter-note rhythms, this could
be an illusion, but the resulting musical piece is
intriguing. In the spirit of the creative process, we
also decided to relax the strict matching of the de-
cipherment symbols into notes.
Figure 5 shows the final version of the output
in which some notes (shown in red) have been
altered or added in order to create a cadential con-
Figure 5: Adjusted output, with chords. Notes which
have been modified from the output in Figure 4 are
color-coded red.
clusion. Interestingly, our altered 32-bar segment
features a highly disjunct first 16-bar phrase, with
an altered pitch (B-flat) implying a potential trans-
position, and a second phrase that is much more
lyrical and based on smaller step-wise intervals,
complete with the “repeated motive.” Upon adding
the implied harmonic accompaniment, we can see
that in some cases there even seem to be an implied
V-I cadences, such as between mm. 16-17, mm.
24-25, and the final added measures. Adding some
phrasing and interesting timbres, as well as chords
based on the implied harmony, gives us the audio
rendering3 shown in Figure 5.
It is important to point out several caveats to this
seemingly encouraging result. First and foremost,
any analysis of musical composition necessarily
has subjective elements. Second, we assume that
rhythmic values are not encoded in the cipher, and
limit the decipherment to quarter-notes. It is also
possible that the score may not be connected to
common practice notation or even diatonic pitches
at all. For example, these could be referring to a
very specific set of church bells, or perhaps some
other kind of instrument or sonic contraption, or
even just rhythm.
7
Conclusions
Although we do not claim to have solved the mys-
tery of Dorabella, our process produced a listenable
melody, which opens up interesting avenues of in-
vestigation. In the future, we plan to experiment
with different corpora and musical attributes, such
as rhythm only. Our approach represents a creative
way to generate new forms of musical melodies.
What seems certain is that Elgar’s intention to con-
found left us with a tantalizing riddle that invites
further speculation in the future.
References
Daniel Hartmeier. 2017. Clues (or red herrings) to the
Dorabella cipher.
benzedrine.ch.
https://www.
benzedrine.ch/dorabella.html.
Bradley Hauer, Colin Choi, Anirudh Sundar, Abram
Hindle, Scott Smallwood, and Grzegorz Kondrak.
2021. Experimental analysis of the Dorabella cipher
with statistical language models. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Historical Cryptol-
ogy (HistoCrypt).
3https://zenodo.org/record/4764819/
files/fig3.wav?download=1
Bradley Hauer, Ryan Hayward, and Grzegorz Kondrak.
2014. Solving substitution ciphers with combined
language models. In Proceedings of COLING, the
25th International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics: Technical Papers, pages 2314–2325, Dublin,
Ireland.
Kate Helsen and Debra Lacoste. 2011. A report on the
encoding of melodic incipits in the cantus database
with the music font’volpiano’. Plainsong & Medieval
Music, 20(1):51.
Debra Lacoste. 2012. The cantus database: Mining for
medieval chant traditions. Digital Medievalist, 7.
ManYat Lo and Simon M Lucas. 2006. Evolving mu-
sical sequences with n-gram based trainable fitness
functions. In 2006 ieee international conference on
evolutionary computation, pages 601–608. IEEE.
Leonard C Manzara, Ian H Witten, and Mark James.
1992. On the entropy of music: An experiment with
Bach chorale melodies. Leonardo Music Journal,
2(1):81–88.
Jon McCormack. 1996. Grammar based music com-
position. In In R. Stocker et al. (Eds.), From Local
Interactions to Global Phenomena, Complex Systems
96. ISO Press.
Peter Norvig. 2009. Natural language corpus data. In
Toby Segaran and Jeff Hammerbacher, editors, Beau-
tiful Data: The Stories Behind Elegant Data Solution,
pages 219–242. O’Reilly Media.
Malte Nuhn, Julian Schamper, and Hermann Ney. 2013.
Beam search for solving substitution ciphers.
In
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1568–
1576.
Wayne Packwood. 2020. Elgar as cryptographer – tun-
ing and turing. Musical Opinion Quarterly, pages
34–37.
Nick Pelling. 2012. Dorabella cipher. Cipher Myster-
ies.
Eric Sams. 1970. Elgar’s cipher letter to Dorabella. The
Musical Times, 111(1524):151–154.
Charles Richard Santa and Matthew Santa. 2010. Solv-
ing Elgar’s Enigma. Current Musicology.
Klaus Schmeh. 2018. Examining the Dorabella Cipher
with three lesser-known cryptanalysis methods. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on His-
torical Cryptology (HistoCrypt), pages 145–152.
Simon Singh. 2011. The code book: the science of
secrecy from ancient Egypt to quantum cryptography.
Anchor.
Jacek Wołkowicz, Zbigniew Kulka, and Vlado Keˇselj.
2008. N-gram-based approach to composer recogni-
tion. Archives of Acoustics, 33(1):43–55.
