Neural Network Verification is
a Programming Language Challenge
Lucas C. Cordeiro1, Matthew L. Daggitt2, Julien Girard-Satabin3, Omri Isac4,
Taylor T. Johnson5, Guy Katz4, Ekaterina Komendantskaya6,7, Augustin
Lemesle3, Edoardo Manino1, Artjoms Šinkarovs6, and Haoze Wu8
1 University of Manchester, UK
2 University of Western Australia, Australia
3 Atomic Energy and Alternative Energies Commission, France
4 Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
5 Vanderbilt University, USA
6 Southampton University, UK
7 Heriot-Watt Univerwsity, UK
8 Amherst College, USA
Abstract. Neural network verification is a new and rapidly developing
field of research. So far, the main priority has been establishing efficient
verification algorithms and tools, while proper support from the program-
ming language perspective has been considered secondary or unimpor-
tant. Yet, there is mounting evidence that insights from the programming
language community may make a difference in the future development of
this domain. In this paper, we formulate neural network verification chal-
lenges as programming language challenges and suggest possible future
solutions.
Keywords: Neural Networks · Verification · Domain Specific Languages.
1
Introduction
Traditionally, statistical machine learning has distinguished its methods from
“algorithm-driven” programming: the consensus has been that machine learning
is deployed when there is example input-output data but no general algorithm
for computing outputs from inputs. Thus, neural networks are commonly seen
as programs that emerge from data via training, without direct human guidance
on how to perform the computation. This unfortunate dichotomy has led to a
divide between programming language and machine learning research that is still
awaiting resolution.
The first hint that this dichotomy is not as fundamental as was thought
came from the machine learning community itself. The famous paper by Szegedy
et al. [112] pointed out the “intriguing” problem that even the most accurate
neural networks fail to satisfy the property of robustness, i.e. small perturbations
of their inputs should result in small changes to their output. Szegedy’s key
example concerned imperceptible perturbations of pixels in an image that can
arXiv:2501.05867v2  [cs.PL]  30 Jan 2025
2
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
Systems with
NN Components
(External)
Specification
NN Property
(optimisation objective)
NN Property∗
(formal specification)
NN Training
NN Verification
Original NN
Implementation
Verifier friendly
Implementation∗
Fig. 1: Schematic representation of the state of the art in training and verifying neural
networks for properties. Solid lines denote methods widely accepted by the research
communities, dashed lines mean “some experimental prototypes exist”, dotted arrows
mean the connection is desired but not established.
sway the neural network’s classification decisions. This lack of robustness can
have safety and security implications: for example, an autonomous car’s vision
unit may fail to recognise pedestrians on the road. For that reason, the problem
attracted significant attention [25] but remains unresolved to this day. Partial
solutions often deploy methods of adversarial training — i.e., training based
on computing adversarial attacks — which augment the training set with the
worst-case perturbations of the input data points with respect to the output loss
of the neural network [78].
The robustness of neural networks actually yields a formal specification [26].
Given a neural network f : Rm →Rn, f is robust around ˆx ∈Rm, if
∀x, ∥ˆx −x∥≤ϵ =⇒∥f(ˆx) −f(x)∥≤δ,
(1)
where ϵ, δ ∈R are small constants and ∥.∥computes a vector distance. From the
programming language perspective, robustness can be seen as a refinement type
that refines input and output types of f, cf. [77]. At the same time, robustness
is an example of a desirable property that neural networks cannot learn from
data alone: note the quantification over vectors x that do not belong to the data
set. This challenges the classical dichotomy between algorithm-driven and data-
driven programming, demonstrating the inevitability of property specification in
both cases.
Against this background, both the machine learning and verification commu-
nities proposed several useful methods of training for, or respectively verifying,
certain properties9. Fig. 1 depicts these two groups of methods as two parallel
pipelines. At the top, we include all adversarial training methods [78] that were
generalised to account for arbitrary optimisation objectives, given a property in-
formally expressed in (a fragment of) first-order logic [46,52]. At the bottom, we
include the verification pipeline which is supported by more than a dozen neural
network verifiers, such as Marabou [75,120], αβ-CROWN [119], PyRAT [51], to
name but a few. Unlike the machine learning approaches, it features a formal lan-
guage for property specification, VNN-LIB. Furthermore, an annual competition
VNN-COMP develops common standards for this domain [20,19].
9 We deliberately use the term “properties" rather than “specifications" here, as the latter means
the presence of a sufficiently general specification language.
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
3
However, there are several fundamental problems that prevent these emerg-
ing ideas from developing to full fruition. Firstly, both the machine learning and
verification communities assume that in theory a neural network can be opti-
mised for the desirable verification property. However, without any program-
ming language support to ensure this formally, discrepancies between machine
learning objectives and verification objectives have been found in the literature,
even for simple robustness properties [26]. In Fig. 1, this problem is depicted by
distinguishing the two versions of NN Property and NN Property∗and a
dotted line between them. The desirable solution is to have a single language
with the relevant specification, which is then compiled down to either verification
or machine learning backends.
Similarly, discrepancies have been reported between different representations
of neural networks [71], e.g., using real numbers in verification and floating point
numbers in training. In Fig. 1, this problem is depicted by showing two poten-
tially disagreeing implementations, Implementation and Implementation∗.
Ideally, we should be able to verify the actual programs, and not their idealised
descriptions. Or, as an equally acceptable alternative, the solid arrow between
two implementations in Fig. 1 should be reversed in the other direction – ensure
that the guarantees concerning the verified neural networks extend to their ac-
tual implementations, thus establishing the connection along the bottom dotted
arrow in Fig. 1.
Finally, neural networks are rarely implemented as stand-alone programs.
More often, they are embedded into larger system development that, in turn,
may have its own specification and verification regimes. Although the idea of a
verified neural network controller is not itself new to the cyber-physical system
research (cf. § 3.7), the programming language support for verification of such
systems is a nascent field [115,89].
In this light, we believe it is time to discuss how the verification and syn-
thesis of safe neural networks fit together with general programming practices.
In this “Fresh Perspectives” paper, we give an overview of the current state of
the art in implementing neural network verification and explain the challenges
the neural network verification community currently faces (Sec. 3). We do so
by tracing different parts of the diagram in Fig. 1, and explaining the nature
of the discrepancies in its different parts, from the programming language point
of view. We wrap up this paper by suggesting possible ways the programming
language community can help improve the state of the art (Sec. 4).
2
Neural Network Verification Properties
The problem of defining verification properties for neural networks has received
substantial attention. Verification approaches started with neural networks de-
ployed as controllers in autonomous systems [102,74]. With time, they were gen-
eralised to cover data-dependent verification properties such as robustness [64,43,42,122].
A set of standard benchmarks is revised and updated annually at the VNN-
COMP; the competition reports [21,18] provide a thorough overview of them.
Neural network verification properties can be divided into three categories.
4
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
1. Geometric properties. These properties are based on the geometry of the
data manifold without any appeal to its possible semantic meaning. One
such property is (local) robustness, whose definition is given in Equation 1
(see also the additional examples in [27]). Another related property is (local)
equivalence [114], which constrains the output of two different networks to
be similar under the same input, either in absolute value (ϵ-equivalence) or
class prediction (top-k equivalence).
2. Hyper-properties. These properties require guarantees for any input, rather
than just those close to the data manifold. Classic examples are global robust-
ness [101] and global equivalence [82]. A more recent example of such prop-
erties is confidence-based robustness [8], which allows for some non-robust
behaviour, but only for inputs close to the decision boundary. The latter
complicates the specification and verification process in interesting ways (see
Sec. 4).
3. Domain-specific properties. These properties are based on the presumed
semantics of the data on which the neural network is trained. Usually, they
take the form of admissible intervals on the input and output vector values.
The ACAS Xu challenge (the oldest neural network verification benchmark)
best illustrates this third class of properties. It takes a neural network that
models an aircraft controller: based on five input measurements between the
own ship and an intruder (distance, angles, relative speeds), the neural network
outputs one of five advisory actions (strong/weak left or right, clear of conflict).
When the benchmark was introduced in [74], nine properties were formulated
by the engineers who designed the collision avoidance software. For instance,
Property 3 states that if the intruder is directly ahead and is moving towards
the own ship, the network will not advise clear of conflict. When written in the
VNN-LIB query language [35] (see Sec. 3.1), the property is translated to real-
valued intervals on the five input measurements and a constraint on the output
prediction.
3
Neural Network Verification: State of the Art
In this section, we describe the state of the art in neural network verification,
from the perspective of the existing programming language support, rather than
the existing verification algorithms. For the latter, the tutorial [4] is available. We
will proceed by tracing different arrows of Figure 1 and explaining the existing
discrepancies and solutions.
3.1
Verification pipeline
Neural Network Verification Problem. Let us start with describing the
common verification pipeline illustrated in Fig. 2. Given a trained neural net-
work f : Rm →Rn and some network property Ξ, the Neural Network Verifica-
tion Problem is the problem of deciding whether Ξ(f) holds. Current verifiers
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
5
Systems with
NN Components
(External)
Specification
NN Property
(optimisation objective)
NN Property∗
(formal specification)
NN Training
NN Verification
Original NN
Implementation
Verifier friendly
Implementation∗
Fig. 2: Schematic representation of the neural network verification pipeline.
assume using a special format — ONNX (standing for Open Neural Network
Exchange) [1] — to represent the neural networks. Thus, in reality, we verify
Ξ(f ∗), where f ∗is obtained from f by ONNX translation.
The verifiers typically consider properties defining a precondition on the
network inputs and a postcondition on its outputs. Both conditions are most
commonly linear (e.g., defined using linear bounds) and represent safe regions.
Formally, let Ξ := ⟨P, Q⟩where P : Rm →{⊤, ⊥} and Q : Rn →{⊤, ⊥}. The
neural network verification problem is then deciding whether ∀x ∈Rm : P(x) ⇒
Q(f ∗(x)). Neural network verification algorithms then attempt to find a coun-
terexample (i.e., x ∈Rm such that P(x)∧¬Q(f ∗(x))) or conclude there is none.
Several neural network verifiers are currently available to solve such verification
problems: e.g. Marabou [75,120], αβ-CROWN [119], PyRAT [51], NNV [117,85]
and ERAN [110]. Since 2020, an annual International Verification of Neural Net-
works Competition (VNN-COMP) has been held, and has played an important
role in consolidating the new research community and developing standards for
this domain [20,19].
Mainstream specification languages. Most neural network verifiers have
a basic query language for representing individual queries. These formats are
invariably simple enough so that the type-system is implicit rather than explicit
and they possess no capability to abstract over definitions. The de-facto standard
is the VNN-LIB query language [35] which is used in VNN-COMP [11]. The
language is a subset of the QFLRA fragment of the SMT-LIB language, an
S-expression based language widely used in the SMT verification community
as a standard input for SMT provers [13]. The goal of VNN-LIB is to model
first-order logic properties on the inputs and outputs of neural networks. Fig. 3
illustrates a snippet of robustness specification written in VNN-LIB. As can be
seen, VNN-LIB specification itself does not explicitly talk about the functions f
or f ∗, rather it is assuming that the property will be used to verify the function
f ∗provided in a separate ONNX file. Thus, VNN-LIB and ONNX together serve
as a specification for Ξ(f ∗).
From a programming language perspective, there are several issues with the
VNN-LIB format as a language for expressing specifications.
1. Lack of expressivity. VNN-LIB and ONNX are simply not expressive
enough to represent all the specifications users want to write. For example,
the VNN-LIB and ONNX formats can only refer to a single neural network
6
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
(declare-const X_0 Real)
(declare-const X_1 Real)
...
(declare-const X_791 Real)
(declare-const Y_0 Real)
...
(declare-const Y_8 Real)
(declare-const Y_9 Real)
(assert (<= X_0 0.0))
(assert (>= X_0 0.0))
...
(assert (<= X_791 -58.231295852661134))
(assert (>= X_791 -75.58388969421387))
...
(assert (>= Y_5 Y_1))
(assert (>= Y_5 Y_3))
Fig. 3: Snippet of robustness specification in VNN-Lib for an image data set that has
input of dimension 792 and 10 classes. The specification assumes an external definition
of f ∗: R792 →R10.
at a time, which makes encoding specifications where one needs to express
properties on several neural networks at once impossible. Similarly, hyper-
properties [8,28] cannot be specified in VNN-LIB without special tooling,
and neither can properties involving hidden neurons. Finally, VNN-LIB only
supports satisfaction queries, meaning the specification writer must manu-
ally negate universal queries before being encoded.
2. Lack of conciseness. The lack of abstraction and the limitation that vari-
ables cannot represent multi-dimensional tensors means that more complex
properties cannot be represented concisely. Consequently, the length of the
queries tend to scale with the dimensions of inputs and outputs of the net-
work, even when the property can be expressed concisely in mathematics in
constant space. For example, the full specification in Fig. 3 that encodes the
single line of Eq. 1 is a couple of thousand lines long.
3. Lack of rigour. VNN-LIB does not have a formally defined semantics, nor
does it even formally define its own syntax. Consequently, it is difficult for
users to check whether their specification in VNN-LIB is correct or com-
pliant, and impossible to prove the soundness of tools that either consume
or generate VNN-LIB. Furthermore, the ONNX format that VNN-LIB relies
on, also lacks a formal semantics. For example, the ONNX documentation for
the convolution operator10 has no proper mathematical specification for the
semantics of the operator, describing it only with the single sentence “The
convolution operator consumes an input tensor and a filter, and computes
the output”. Other ONNX operator descriptions like those of Convolution,
Maxpool, or Add (for broadcasting) refer to external sources like Numpy,
PyTorch or Tensorflow for more implementation details.
4. Lack of dynamic bindings to datasets. Crucial to most attempts to
specify “correctness” of a neural network is the notion of the data manifold,
i.e., the distribution of inputs that the neural network will actually encounter
during operation. Usually, the data manifold is only a small subset of the
actual input space. By definition, the network should never encounter inputs
that lie off the data-manifold during normal operation. If it does, there is
no reason to require any particular behaviour from the network, and con-
10 https://onnx.ai/onnx/operators/onnx__Conv.html, accessed 21-09-2024
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
7
sequently, specifications should only quantify over inputs that lie on the
manifold. The problem is that, in most cases, there is no precise mathemat-
ical definition of the data manifold. Therefore, the most common approach
is for the specification to approximate the manifold as the union of “small”
regions around each input in the training dataset. Unfortunately, the train-
ing datasets themselves are frequently huge, anywhere from thousands to
hundreds of millions of items. Therefore, it is infeasible to directly express
the dataset in the specification.
This lack of rigour of the underlying specification format has been recognised as
a major problem. A recent effort in the ONNX community has led to the creation
of a ONNX Safety-Related Profile working group11 which aims to elaborate a
dedicated ONNX profile for safety-related systems. While still embryonic, this
working group might answer some of the issues highlighted above.
To work around the remaining problems, the natural solution is to allow
users to represent their specifications in a higher-level specification language,
connecting the neural network specification to the language of the larger system
in which it is embedded. Moreover, the specification language must provide some
mechanism for dynamically binding variables to existing datasets in standard
formats used by machine learning practitioners.
3.2
Prototypes of New Specification Languages
In response to the outlined problems, two major attempts have been made to de-
sign more principled specification languages for neural network verification. We
outline the essence of both, in turn. Fig. 4 provides code snippets for illustration.
1. CAISAR. The CAISAR platform [51] incorporates a higher-level specifi-
cation language deriving from WhyML [45]. WhyML is a typed first-order
language with pattern-matching, polymorphism, and a module system. On
top of that, CAISAR provides additional types of linear algebra structures
common in machine learning and compiles the specification back to plain
WhyML. Writing a compiler from WhyML to VNN-LIB is straightforward,
allowing CAISAR to target all state-of-the-art solvers from one single specifi-
cation. It can also deal with specifications involving multiple neural networks
and dynamically bind variables to concrete datasets. However, it can be ar-
gued that the composability of WhyML is limited, and the lack of dependent
types prevents the modelling of important properties (for instance, encod-
ing the dimension of inputs directly in their types could prevent common
runtime errors).
2. Vehicle. The Vehicle specification language [33,32,31] is a higher-order and
dependently-typed functional language. The language aims to be able to ex-
press a full range of specifications and to that end it contains quantifiers as
first-class language constructs, conditionals and higher-order functions over
11 https://github.com/ericjenn/working-groups/blob/ericjenn-srpwg-wg1/
safety-related-profile/README.md
8
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
theory MNIST
use ieee_float.Float64
use caisar.types.Float64WithBounds as Feature
use caisar.types.IntWithBounds as Label
use caisar.model.Model
use caisar.dataset.CSV
use caisar.robust.ClassRobustCSV
constant model_filename: string
constant dataset_filename: string
constant label_bounds: Label.bounds =
Label.{ lower = 0; upper = 9 }
constant feature_bounds: Feature.bounds =
Feature.{ lower = (0.0:t); upper = (1.0:t) }
[...]
predicate robust (f_bounds: Feature.bounds)
(l_bounds: Label.bounds)
(m: model) (eps: t)
(l: Label.t)
(e: FeatureVector.t) =
forall perturbed_e: FeatureVector.t.
has_length perturbed_e (length e) ->
FeatureVector.valid f_bounds perturbed_e ->
let perturbation = perturbed_e - e in
bounded_by_epsilon perturbation eps ->
advises l_bounds m perturbed_e l
[...]
goal robustness:
let nn = read_model model_filename in
let dataset = read_dataset dataset_filename in
let eps = (0.010000000...:t) in
robust feature_bounds label_bounds nn dataset eps
end
(a) CAISAR
type Label = Index 10
type Image = Tensor Rat [28, 28]
@network
mnist : Image -> Tensor Rat [10]
validImage : Image -> Bool
validImage x = forall i j .
0 <= x ! i ! j <= 1
advises : Image -> Label -> Bool
advises x i = forall j .
j != i => mnist x ! i > mnist x ! j
@parameter
epsilon : Rat
boundedByEpsilon : Image -> Bool
boundedByEpsilon x = forall i j .
-epsilon <= x ! i ! j <= epsilon
robust : Label -> Image -> Bool
robust label image = forall perturbation .
boundedByEpsilon perturbation and
validImage (perturbation + image) =>
advises label (perturbation + image)
@parameter(infer=True)
n : Nat
@dataset
images : Tensor Image [n]
@dataset
labels : Tensor Label [n]
@property
robustness : Tensor Bool [n]
robustness = foreach i .
robustAround (images ! i) (labels ! i)
(b) Vehicle
Fig. 4: An extract from a local robustness specification in CAISAR and Vehicle’s input
languages for the same image dataset described in Fig. 3. Note the ability to reuse
predicates and definitions, the conciseness of vector-based operations, and the explicit
data set bindings.
tensors such as maps and folds. The language’s dependently typed nature al-
lows the user to encode richer properties and includes tensor size constraints
that can be checked before verification by the type-checker. Vehicle also has a
backend that allows connecting proofs of neural network properties to larger
system specifications in Agda [32]. However, unlike CAISAR, it connects to
far fewer tools and cannot allow multiple solvers to work together.
These two languages solve the problems outlined in Sec. 3.1 and provide a
concrete implementation. Note, in particular, that both manage data set bind-
ings, neural network bindings, and data validity checks in clear, explicit ways. By
doing this, they are essentially building the specification languages on top of the
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
9
Systems with
NN Components
(External)
Specification
NN Property
(optimisation objective)
NN Property∗
(formal specification)
NN Training
NN Verification
Original NN
Implementation
Verifier friendly
Implementation∗
Fig. 5: Schematic representation of the embedding gap.
existing pipelines: in Figs. 1 and 2, this is depicted by a dashed “Specification”
box towards the left side. Other specification languages exist, like NeSAL [123]
(which has no implementation) or DNNP [107] (lacking quantifiers and strong
typing).
3.3
The Embedding Gap
We now consider the influence of larger system verification on the neural net-
work verification pipeline (see Fig. 5). Consider a purely symbolic program s(·),
whose completion requires computing a complex, unknown function H : P →R
that maps objects in the problem input space P to those in the problem out-
put space R. Given an embedding function e : P →Rm and an unembed-
ding function u : Rn →R, we can approximate H by training a neural net-
work f : Rm →Rn such that u ◦f ◦e ≈H. We refer to u ◦f ◦e as the solution,
and refer to Rm and Rn as the embedding input space and embedding output
space respectively. Unlike objects in the problem space, the vectors in the em-
bedding space are often not directly interpretable. The complete program is then
modelled as s(u ◦f ◦e). Examples of u and e would be the normalization of in-
puts, resizing operations for images, or data augmentation operations that are
commonplace in machine learning pipelines.
Our end goal is to prove that s(u ◦f ◦e) satisfies a property Ψ, which we
will refer to as the program property. The natural way to proceed is to establish
a solution property Φ and a network property Ξ such that the proof of Ψ is
decomposable into the following three lemmas:
Ξ(f)
(2)
∀g : Ξ(g) ⇒Φ(u ◦g ◦e)
(3)
∀h : Φ(h) ⇒Ψ(s(h))
(4)
i.e. Lemma 2 proves that the network f obeys the network property Ξ, then
Lemma 3 proves that this implies u◦f◦e, the neural network lifted to the problem
space, obeys the solution property Φ, and finally Lemma 4 proves that this
implies s(u ◦f ◦e), the neuro-symbolic program, obeys the program property Ψ.
The first issue that we run into is what we call the embedding gap. In Ψ, users
would like to be able to model data that potentially has non-trivial semantics
(for example, featuring both continuous and discrete parameters of a cyber-
physical system such as velocity, stopping distance, switches etc.). However, in
10
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
Embedding
gap
Problem space
Embedding space
Specification
of Φ, e, u
Specification
language
Training
with Ξ
Training platform
Tensorflow etc.
Verification
of Ξ
NN Verifiers
Marabou etc.
Integration
of Φ with Ψ
ITPs
Agda etc.
Fig. 6: Outline of Vehicle compiler backends, bridging the Embedding Gap [33,32].
Dashed lines indicate information flow and solid lines automatic compilation.
Ξ, all values must be represented as continuous real vectors (in actuality, at the
training phase, floating-point vectors, cf. Sec. 3.4). A function from the latter to
the former must be highly non-surjective.
For example, consider an input type with two values, ‘Yes’ and ‘No’, encoded
as real values ‘0.0’ and ‘1.0’ correspondingly. In the low-level query, one can en-
code that this input variable can only take two possible values using a disjunctive
constraint (x = 0.0 ∨x = 1.0), but this does not scale well as the number of
constructors in the data type grows, as each disjunction drastically increases the
cost of verification. Instead, the most common current solution is to encode this
as a single non-disjunctive constraint, 0.0 ≤x ≤1. In this case, the problem
is that floating-point numbers may contain other values (e.g., ‘0.005’, ‘0.97’),
which are meaningless in the chosen domain.
More generally, if users are to express specifications in Ψ, the high-level spec-
ification language must also allow users to specify the embedding and unem-
bedding functions, e and u, as part of the specification. It should then be the
responsibility of the compiler to generate suitable low-level queries representing
Ξ. However, allowing the user to encode their specifications at the high-level Φ
requires that the specification language compiler must be able to automatically
translate from the former to the latter. The only existing attempt to provide
programming language support for this was made by Vehicle [33,32,31] as shown
in Fig. 6. In particular, Vehicle proposes a specification language to express Φ, e,
u, and can compile the specification to Agda, in which more general properties
of s(·) can be defined.
3.4
The Implementation Gap
In Sec. 3.1 we considered Ξ(f ∗), where f ∗was an ONNX object, possibly ob-
tained by conversion from the original implementation of f. The ONNX format
has no backward translation from f ∗to f, as the diagram in Fig. 7 shows.
However, in the majority of neural network verification publications, authors
implicitly assume that obtained verification guarantees about f ∗extend to f. In
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
11
Systems with
NN Components
(External)
Specification
NN Property
(optimisation objective)
NN Property∗
(formal specification)
NN Training
NN Verification
Original NN
Implementation
Verifier friendly
Implementation∗
Fig. 7: Schematic representation of the implementation gap.
this section, we outline a range of problems caused by this and thus trace the
right-most section of the diagram illustrated in Figs. 1 and 7.
Poor support for neural architecture conversion to ONNX. ONNX
re-implementation of original neural networks remains a largely manual and
un-verified procedure, which may be a source of errors. For example, neural
networks contain different types of linear (e.g., fully connected, convolutional)
and non-linear (e.g., ReLU, sigmoid, MaxPool) connections. Supporting the for-
mal analysis of a new type of connection typically requires tool developers to
add a new dedicated module to the codebase. For example, in verifiers based
on abstract interpretation [110], this process would involve implementing the
abstract transformer for the new type of connection. In SMT-based verification
procedures [74,121], the developer would need to implement the encoding, sim-
plification, and satisfiability checking of constraints corresponding to the new
connection. This process is tedious, repetitive, and error-prone. For example,
the verification code for two-phase activation functions such as ReLU, Leaky
ReLU, and absolute values is very similar, yet developers typically need to hard-
code separate verification modules for each of these connections. Ideally, there
should be automated conversion procedures with correctness guarantees.
Mismatch in numerical types. Barring experimental architectures that rely
on analog computing [124], most implementations of neural networks are based
on digital platforms that operate with finite-precision types such as integer and
floating-point numbers. Effective conversion between real-valued types and finite-
precision ones is an active research direction in machine learning [49].
The most ubiquitous numerical type in machine learning is the floating-point
number [81,14]. Indeed, the IEEE 754 single precision (32-bit) floating point
type [65] is the de facto standard of libraries such as Tensorflow12 and Py-
torch13. Efforts to improve over the IEEE 754 standard exist, but they are often
relegated to the context of hardware accelerators, where reducing the bit-size
of numerical types may yield significant gains in terms of speed, memory and
power consumption [118,23].
From the verification perspective, it is well known that the safety certificates
produced by real-valued neural network verifiers do not hold for floating-point
12 https://www.tensorflow.org
13 https://pytorch.org/
12
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
implementations [71,129]. Indeed, Jia and Rinard [71] propose an algorithm to
search for floating-point counterexamples to real-valued safety certificates, thus
invalidating them. Similarly, Zombori et al. [129] construct neural networks that
contain undetectable backdoors, as long as the effects of numerical precision are
neglected. Furthermore, the counterexamples produced by real-valued verifiers
may not exist on a floating-point implementation of the same neural network, a
phenomenon that has been reported on some VNN-COMP benchmarks [91].
Other sources of non-determinism. The current machine learning workflow,
from training to inference, is not reproducible across different hardware and
software platforms [100,29,128,105]. This is due to a variety of reasons:
1. Non-associativity of floating-point. It is well-known that floating-point
operations are not associative, i.e., a + (b + c) ̸= (a + b) + c. As such, we can
only verify the behaviour of a floating-point neural network if we know the
order of all its operations. The existing de-facto standard ONNX does not
include such a level of detail.
2. Parallel execution. Inference and training of neural networks are often
sped up via parallel execution. Whether this is done via SIMD operations,
multi-core CPUs, or GPU parallelism, it always introduces non-determinism
in the results [100,105].
3. Auto-selection of primitives. Modern machine learning compilers like
XLA14 automatically select the most efficient algorithms depending on the
computational load [100]. While PyTorch or Keras present ways to fix the be-
haviour of the algorithm, the ONNX runtime does not. For instance, Schögl
et al. [105] report non-deterministic behaviour in the selection of convo-
lutional algorithms on GPUs, which may alternate between explicit loop,
GEMM-based, Winograd and FFT implementations.
4. Runtime optimisations. Machine learning frameworks may also imple-
ment runtime optimisation modifying the structure of the model itself to
speed up inference or reduce memory usage, for example by fusing layers
together (e.g. convolution and batch normalisation).
5. Non-deterministic training. The learning process itself is highly non-
deterministic. Common sources include: parameter initialisation, data aug-
mentation strategy, batch ordering, and dropout layers [100].
6. Mathematical library rounding. A long-standing issue in floating-point
computation is incorrect roundings in the standard mathematical library
math.h. Technically, the IEEE 754 standard recommends correct round-
ings [65], and there are efforts to create open-source implementations of
math.h that abide by it [108]. However, mainstream compilers instead im-
plement a variety of approximately-rounded algorithms [17].
7. Low-level implementation details. Furthermore, derived operators such
as Softmax may leverage the fact that softmax(x + c) = softmax(x) with
constant c to increase the precision and avoid overflows. Such details can
only be found in the low-level source code, even though they severely affect
the precision of the computation.
14 https://openxla.org/xla
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
13
Overall, the end-to-end effects of the above causes of non-determinism cannot
be neglected. Indeed, Pham et al. [100] reports a 2.9% difference in accuracy
while reproducing the same training run on different platforms. Similarly, Cidon
et al. [29] reports a 6% difference in accuracy when considering the whole image
recognition pipeline, including camera noise and image processing algorithms.
From the verification perspective, certifying the safety of neural network
implementations requires a different approach than high-level neural network
verifiers like Marabou [120] or αβ-CROWN [119]. Indeed, if we had access to
the low-level implementation of every library in the machine learning pipeline,
we could employ software verifiers [15] for this purpose. Unfortunately, existing
software verifiers struggle to cope with the scale and complexity of neural net-
work code [91,88,92]. In contrast, automated testing approaches are currently
more effective [98,56,36], but cannot prove correctness.
Quantised neural networks. Switching to integer types (uniform quantisa-
tion) [49] can help alleviate some of the above problems (e.g. non-associativity
of floating point, incorrect rounding) and improve reproducibility. From the ma-
chine learning perspective, a good quantisation scheme maintains the accuracy
of the original floating-point neural network. Usually, 8-bit integers are used,
but more aggressive quantisation schemes exist, down to ternary [58] and binary
representations [103].
From the verification perspective, integer and binary data types require fun-
damentally different representations than the real-valued types used by main-
stream verifiers such as Marabou [120] and αβ-CROWN [119]. Existing work
on verifying quantised neural networks relies on either the bit-vector SMT the-
ory [50,12,59] or (mixed) integer linear programming (ILP, MILP) [94,82,126,63].
In contrast, verifying the robustness of some binarised neural network architec-
tures can be encoded as a satisfiability (SAT) problem [97,70]. Other binarised
architectures can still be encoded as a real-valued verification instance [6].
3.5
Reliable Proof Production and Checking
To overcome some of the challenges raised above, neural network verifiers may
accompany their results with proof certificates, attesting their soundness using
an external and relatively simple checking program (the proof checker) [66].
Since neural network verifiers are complex software, optimised for performance
and speed, their verification is commonly intractable. Thus, proof production
replaces the need to directly verify the neural network verifiers, with the need to
verify only the proof checker. When a safety property is violated, neural network
verifiers often accompany their results with a counterexample, which can then be
checked by its evaluation in the network. However, proving safety (i.e., absence
of violation of the property) is not straightforward, as the DNN verification
problem is NP-complete even for simple networks [74,104]. Therefore, proving
safety is a greater challenge than proving a violation, and thus requires a more
complicated proof and, consequently, a more complicated proof checker.
14
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
Systems with
NN Components
(External)
Specification
NN Property
(optimisation objective)
NN Property∗
(formal specification)
NN Training
NN Verification
Original NN
Implementation
Verifier friendly
Implementation∗
Fig. 8: Schematic representation of the neural network training pipeline.
Proof production mechanism, supporting several piecewise-linear activation
functions, was implemented on top of Marabou [66,120]. The proofs produced
by Marabou are checked by a proof checker implemented within Marabou. The
Marabou proof checker is implemented in C++ and uses floating points arith-
metic for its computations.
When using an external proof checker, the reliability of the neural network
verifier is dependent on the reliability of the proof checker. Therefore, the proof
checker is expected to meet higher standards of reliability, ideally provable sound-
ness. Functional programming languages allow the implementation of a precise
checker and formal verification of its soundness. For example, a simply-typed
language Imandra was deployed to check proofs produced by Marabou [37,38].
This work also shows that computations with precise real arithmetic come at a
price of limited performance. This opens up the possibility for a variety of imple-
mentations of the same checking algorithm in different programming languages,
exploring the trade-off between precision and performance speed.
3.6
Property-Guided Training
Finally, we give a brief outline of the state-of-the-art in the property-guided
training, which occupies the upper section of Fig. 8. This is a booming area in
its own right, also known under the umbrella term of neuro-symbolic AI. By
pointing out existing programming language discrepancies and solutions, we do
not attempt to give a full survey of neuro-symbolic AI, but refer the reader to
more comprehensive surveys [53,60].
In the introduction, we have already outlined the evolution from adversarial
training (seen as training for the robustness property specifically) into a more
general property-driven training (for any property of choice) [46,111,47]. It is
noteworthy that, although robust training by projected gradient descent [54,87,79]
predates verification, contemporary approaches are often related to, or derived
from, the corresponding verification methods by optimizing verification-inspired
regularization terms.
The weakest form of property-based training boils down to translating a spec-
ification written in a subset of first-order logic into a loss function, that serves
directly as an optimisation objective within the implementation of a training
algorithm. Thus, the training algorithm optimises the neural network to sat-
isfy the desired property. This translation method is known under the name of
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
15
differentiable logic (or DL) [46,111,47]. Vehicle implements DL as one of its back-
ends [32] (cf. Fig. 6) and serves as a prototype of a compiler for neural network
property specification languages (cf. Fig. 1). Recently, this inspired attempts at
formalising different DLs in Coq [2].
There are other forms of training for robustness that come with stronger
guarantees than DLs, e.g. IBP training [55,125] and certified training [96,127].
However, these usually have limited capacity for property specification; investiga-
tion of how these methods may fit into larger verification pipelines is warranted.
3.7
Other Directions
Verification of Cyber-Physical Systems. When following the diagram of
Fig. 1, we did not impose any assumptions on the nature of properties we wish
to ensure. In particular, we did not specify whether the “System” needs to be a
cyber-physical system (CPS). However, CPS with machine learning components
is an important safety-critical use case for neural network verification.
For example, a neural network may be utilized as a feedback controller
for some plant model, typically represented as ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) or generalizations thereof like hybrid automata. These are known as
neural networks control systems (NNCS). The introduction of constraints to de-
scribe the dynamics of a CPS requires revisiting several blocks of Fig. 1. Specifi-
cally, we need to replace the purely symbolic specifications and algorithms with
those allowing for continuous variables and differential equations.
The annual International Competition on Verifying Continuous and Hybrid
Systems (ARCH-COMP) has a category for this problem class, known as the
AI and NNCS (AINNCS) category [86,73,72,83,84]. Several approaches for ad-
dressing the NNCS verification problem have been developed, such as imple-
mented within software tools like CORA [76], JuliaReach [16], NNV [117,85],
OVERT [109], POLAR [61], Sherlock [41,40], ReachNN* [62,44], VenMAS [3],
and Verisig [69,68,67].
More broadly, researchers have considered several strategies for the specifi-
cation of properties of CPS with neural network components [48,7,24]. These
cover significant challenges in the CPS domain, ranging from classical software
verification problems to real-time systems concerns, scalability, as well as finding
suitable specifications [106,116,115,89]. Similarly to the standard neural network
verification pipeline of Fig. 1, this area would benefit from a more principled pro-
gramming language support.
Formal Specification of Probabilistic Properties. Program synthesis tech-
niques can be valuable allies in producing correct-by-construction software and
systems. In particular, the synthesis of logical formulas from a neural network
and a dataset (e.g., via Inductive Logical Programming) received long-timed in-
terest [99]. Also orthogonal to our work is Probabilistic Programming (as seen
in [90]), which aims to provide a language and toolchain to express probabilistic
properties of programs. It is clear that neural networks – seen as programs –
16
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
Existing Solutions
High-level Low-level Quantised Software Future
PL Challenges Addressed
Vehicle [33]
CAISAR [51]
αβ-Crown [119]
Marabou [75]
QEBVerif [126]
Aster [82]
CBMC [80]
ESBMC [93]
Unified Language
Formal Interfaces
§3.1-3.2. Rigorous Semantics ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
§3.3. Embedding Gap
✓
✓
✓
§3.4. Implementation Gap
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
§3.5. Proof Certificates
✓
✓∗
✓
✓
§3.6. Supports Training
✓
✓
✓
Table 1: Examples of existing solutions and the PL challenges they (partially) ad-
dress. For the sake of variety, we include the existing solutions in four distinct cat-
egories: high-level neural network verification DSLs (Vehicle, CAISAR); best-
performing (according to VNNCOMP) low-level neural network verifiers (αβ-
Crown, Marabou); formalisation and synthesis of quantised neural networks
with mainstream MILP solvers (QEBVerif, Aster); and the use of general-purpose
software verifiers (CBMC, ESBMC) in neural-network verification. For the latter,
when we mark proof certificate production as ✓∗, we refer to the generic proof produc-
tion available for those verifiers, as opposed to the production of the Farkas witness for
neural network UNSAT problems that is available in Marabou.
would benefit from a probabilistic specification language. An early example in
this direction is the ProbCompCert [113] project.
Formalisation of Machine Learning. So far, research on formalisation of
neural networks or optimisation algorithms has developed in isolation from the
mainstream neural network verification pipelines summarised in Fig. 1. However,
these two lines of research are bound to meet one day. Relevant work in formalisa-
tion of machine learning includes: verification of neural networks in Isabelle/HOL
[22] and Imandra [39]; formalisation of piecewise affine activation functions in
Coq [5]; providing formal guarantees of the degree to which the trained neu-
ral network will generalise to new data in Coq [10]; convergence, in this case
of a single-layered perceptron in Coq [95]; verification of neural archetypes in
Coq [34]. The two approaches that came the closest to unifying formalisation and
verification in neural network domain are the Vehicle formalisation in Agda [9]
and the formalisation of differentiable logics in Coq [2], relation of the latter to
the verification pipeline of Fig. 1 is discussed in Sec. 3.6.
4
The Future Roadmap
The previous section identified five desirable programming language features
that neural network verification could benefit from: rigorous semantics, sup-
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
17
port for handling the embedding and implementation gaps, generation of proof
certificates, and rigorous integration of property-driven training into verification
pipelines. Currently, no single neural network verification tool or framework pos-
sesses all five features (see Table 1). Moreover, some tools considered leaders in
the neural network verification market do not satisfy any. The title of this paper
reflects our belief that the desirable solution – global specifications that formally
explain the expected properties and yield a formal proof that the given imple-
mentation respects the specification – is a challenge in programming language
design. In this section, we overview a couple of possible directions that may play
a role in future solutions.
4.1
A Unified Dependently Typed Language
We believe the idealised solution to be a single language that is expressive enough
to implement the machine learning pipeline and, at the same time, encode the
desired properties of both the neural networks created by the pipeline and the
pipeline itself. The following are a non-exhaustive list of the types of properties
that should be representable:
1. theoretical results about the convergence of the training process;
2. correctness of tensor operations that underlie the training;
3. rich properties of the input data, e.g., constraining inputs to a certain range;
4. relation between input data and the weights in the network produced, e.g.,
robustness;
5. properties of the floating point numbers being used.
Given the complexity of encoding some of these properties (e.g. numerical sta-
bility, robustness), we believe that the expressive power of dependent types is a
natural fit. We now briefly argue how such a unified dependent-typed language
would allow us to make progress towards the challenges outlined in Table 1.
1. Rigorous semantics. The meta-theory of dependent types is well stud-
ied [30] so defining rigorous semantics for the language should not be a
significant challenge. Furthermore, by implementing all the components in a
single language, the friction of aligning the semantics of the different com-
ponents in the system is significantly reduced.
2. Embedding gap. In a dependently typed language, from one perspective
there would be no embedding gap, as any representation changes must be
stated explicitly as type conversions. However, from another perspective,
working in such a language does not address the fundamental problem of
translating the proofs from the problem space to the embedding space. It
merely moves the work from the external proofs into the type-conversion
functions. Nevertheless, the expressive power of dependent types is more than
sufficient to implement the partial solutions proposed by Vehicle (Sec. 3.3).
3. Implementation gap. The implementation gap (Sec. 3.4) will be resolved,
as implementations will respect their types. For example, consider numerical
types. If our specification assumes infinite reals, there is no way to instantiate
18
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
an implementation that uses machine floats, as we will not be able to prove
that machine floats is a valid representation of reals. If our specification is
weak and we do not require properties of the operations or other equalities,
then machine floats may be a valid data type for the chosen constraints. If
we envision implementation to operate on machine floats, we can describe
all the properties of interest (e.g., lack of associativity) in the data type.
We must understand that we cannot use external libraries such as XLA or
OpenBLAS without verifying them, as this will break all the formal guaran-
tees in our specification. Either these libraries have to be verified formally
or we can synthesise the code with similar runtime properties directly from
our specification in a type-preserving way.
4. Proof certificates. In a dependently-typed language, where the specifica-
tions are encoded as types, there is no need for separate proof certificates or
proof checkers. In particular, the terms themselves act as the proof certifi-
cates and the type-checker acts as the proof checker.
5. Supports training. Although at the moment training is carried out in
non-dependently typed languages, there is nothing stopping training (e.g.
automatic differentiation or similar algorithms) from being implemented in
dependently-typed language. Not only would such an implemention signif-
icantly reduce the friction between training and verification, it would also
facilitate the integrating property-driven training and verification by view-
ing it as code synthesis problem. The key idea here is that generating code
from a formal specification is much easier than checking whether the given
code respects the specification.
4.2
Formal Interfaces
However, we are not naive as to the difficulty of implementating such a uni-
fied framework. Firstly, it will be an uphill battle to overcome the significant
first-mover advantage of existing tools in their respective domains, e.g. training
frameworks in Python, C and others and neural network verifiers. Even leaving
that aside, work has shown that checking such complex type-based specifications
in an efficient manner is still a challenging problem (e.g. Kokke et al. [77]).
Therefore, we believe a more realistic short-term goal is to keep the overarch-
ing maximally expressive specification language, but design a compiler that can
utilise existing tools to achieve certain subgoals. In particular, we should follow
the approach of industry, where the use of many disparate systems is common.
In such an environment, the designers of these individual components should
not only rigorously pre-define their interfaces, but also provide full formal spec-
ifications about their behaviour and, ideally, provide proof certificates that the
output satisfies the specification as part of the interface. This would allow the
compiler to specify the expected behaviour of a given module and let the pro-
grammer choose the best implementation (provided it respects the specification)
at that abstraction level.
One possible inspiration for the design of such interfaces could come from
the rich literature of behavioural interface specification language (BISL) [57].
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
19
A BISL is a family of languages used to specify the expected behaviour of a
program at the function level, providing a fine-grained level of control on how
to precisely describe the function. BISLs usually follow a Hoare triplet-inspired
formalism: the programmer should specify the precondition and the control flow;
automated provers using weakest-precondition calculus or SAT can then auto-
matically derive preconditions. Drawing from well-known languages like SPARK
and Eiffel, it would then become easy to specify invariants on several functions
at once. Such properties could then be translated back to the original program
language (and then checked with the type system) or - if it results in a program
that is impossible to represent - checked using external provers. This approach
would be representative of what is being done in the industry for critical systems
for decades, with JML, Why3 [45] or SPARK.
5
Conclusion
We have given some support for our main thesis – that neural network veri-
fication is increasingly becoming a programming language challenge. We hope
this paper will provoke a stimulating discussion of this topic, helping the pro-
gramming language community explore the opportunities presented by this new
domain. Although we have supported our arguments with references to existing
approaches, this is not a survey paper, and we make no claims of bibliographic
completeness.
6
Acknowledgements
M. Daggitt and E. Komendantskaya acknowledge the partial support of the EP-
SRC grant AISEC: AI Secure and Explainable by Construction (EP/T026960/1).
E. Komendantskaya was supported by ARIA: Mathematics for Safe AI grant. L.
Cordeiro and E. Manino acknowledge the support of the EPSRC grant EnnCore:
End-to-End Conceptual Guarding of Neural Architectures (EP/T026995/1). J.
Girard-Satabin and Augustin Lemesle were supported by the French Agence Na-
tionale de la Recherche (ANR) grant ANR-23-DEGR-0001 as part of the France
2030 programme. The work of Isac and Katz was partially funded by the Eu-
ropean Union (ERC, VeriDeL, 101112713). Views and opinions expressed are
however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the
European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither
the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
References
1. Open
Neural
Network
Exchange
format,
https://onnx.ai/,
accessed
on
30.01.2022
2. Affeldt, R., Bruni, A., Komendantskaya, E., Slusarz, N., Stark, K.: Taming Dif-
ferentiable Logics with Coq Formalisation. In: Interactive Theorem Provers (ITP)
2024 (2024)
20
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
3. Akintunde, M.E., Botoeva, E., Kouvaros, P., Lomuscio, A.: Formal verification of
neural agents in non-deterministic environments. In: International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS. pp. 25–33 (2020)
4. Albarghouthi, A.: Introduction to neural network verification (2021), https://
arxiv.org/abs/2109.10317
5. Aleksandrov, A., Völlinger, K.: Formalizing piecewise affine activation functions
of neural networks in Coq. In: 15th International NASA Symposium on Formal
Methods (NFM 2023), Houston, TX, USA, May 16–18, 2023. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 13903, pp. 62–78. Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-031-33170-1_4, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-33170-1_4
6. Amir, G., Wu, H., Barrett, C., Katz, G.: An smt-based approach for verifying
binarized neural networks. In: Groote, J.F., Larsen, K.G. (eds.) Tools and Al-
gorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. pp. 203–222. Springer
International Publishing, Cham (2021)
7. Astorga, A., Hsieh, C., Madhusudan, P., Mitra, S.: Perception contracts for safety
of ml-enabled systems. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7(OOPSLA2) (Oct 2023).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3622875
8. Athavale, A., Bartocci, E., Christakis, M., Maffei, M., Nickovic, D., Weis-
senbacher, G.: Verifying global two-safety properties in neural networks with con-
fidence (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14400
9. Atkey, R., Daggitt, M.L., Kokke, W.: Vehicle formalisation (2024), https://
github.com/vehicle-lang/vehicle-formalisation
10. Bagnall, A., Stewart, G.: Certifying the true error: Machine learning in Coq with
verified generalization guarantees. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. vol. 33, pp. 2662–2669 (2019)
11. Bak, S., Liu, C., Johnson, T.: The Second International Verification of Neural Net-
works Competition (VNN-COMP 2021): Summary and Results (2021), technical
Report. http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.00498
12. Baranowski, M., He, S., Lechner, M., Nguyen, T.S., Rakamarić, Z.: An smt theory
of fixed-point arithmetic. In: Peltier, N., Sofronie-Stokkermans, V. (eds.) Auto-
mated Reasoning. pp. 13–31. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2020)
13. Barrett, C., Fontaine, P., Tinelli, C.: The Satisfiability Modulo Theories Library
(SMT-LIB). www.SMT-LIB.org (2016)
14. Baskin, C., Liss, N., Schwartz, E., Zheltonozhskii, E., Giryes, R., Bronstein, A.M.,
Mendelson, A.: Uniq: Uniform noise injection for non-uniform quantization of
neural networks. ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 37(1–4) (mar 2021). https://doi.
org/10.1145/3444943, https://doi.org/10.1145/3444943
15. Beyer, D.: Competition on software verification and witness validation: Sv-comp
2023. In: Sankaranarayanan, S., Sharygina, N. (eds.) Tools and Algorithms for the
Construction and Analysis of Systems. pp. 495–522. Springer Nature Switzerland,
Cham (2023)
16. Bogomolov, S., Forets, M., Frehse, G., Potomkin, K., Schilling, C.: JuliaReach:
A toolbox for set-based reachability. In: Proc. of the 22nd ACM International
Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control. p. 39–44 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3302504.3311804
17. Brisebarre, N., Hanrot, G., Muller, J.M., Zimmermann, P.: Correctly-rounded
evaluation of a function: why, how, and at what cost? (2024), https://hal.
science/hal-04474530/document
18. Brix, C., Bak, S., Johnson, T.T., Wu, H.: The fifth international verification
of neural networks competition (vnn-comp 2024): Summary and results (2024),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19985
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
21
19. Brix, C., Bak, S., Liu, C., Johnson, T.T.: The Fourth International Verifica-
tion of Neural Networks Competition (VNN-COMP 2023): Summary and Re-
sults. CoRR abs/2312.16760 (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2312.
16760, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.16760
20. Brix, C., Müller, M.N., Bak, S., Johnson, T.T., Liu, C.: First three years of the
international verification of neural networks competition (VNN-COMP). Int. J.
Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 25(3), 329–339 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/
S10009-023-00703-4, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-023-00703-4
21. Brix, C., Müller, M.N., Bak, S., Johnson, T.T., Liu, C.: First three years of the in-
ternational verification of neural networks competition (vnn-comp). International
Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer 25(3), 329–339 (2023)
22. Brucker, A.D., Stell, A.: Verifying feedforward neural networks for classifica-
tion in Isabelle/HOL. In: 25th International Symposium on Formal Methods
(FM 2023), Lübeck, Germany, March 6–10, 2023. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 14000, pp. 427–444. Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-27481-7_24, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-27481-7_24
23. Burgess, N., Milanovic, J., Stephens, N., Monachopoulos, K., Mansell, D.:
Bfloat16 processing for neural networks. In: 2019 IEEE 26th Symposium on Com-
puter Arithmetic (ARITH). pp. 88–91 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/ARITH.
2019.00022
24. Calinescu, R., Imrie, C., Mangal, R., Rodrigues, G.N., Păsăreanu, C., Santana,
M.A., Vázquez, G.: Controller synthesis for autonomous systems with deep-
learning perception components. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
50(6), 1374–1395 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2024.3385378
25. Carlini, N.: A complete list of all (arxiv) adversarial example papers (2019)
26. Casadio, M., Komendantskaya, E., Daggitt, M.L., Kokke, W., Katz, G., Amir, G.,
Refaeli, I.: Neural network robustness as a verification property: A principled case
study. In: Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2022). Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer (2022)
27. Casadio, M., Komendantskaya, E., Daggitt, M.L., Kokke, W., Katz, G., Amir, G.,
Refaeli, I.: Neural network robustness as a verification property: A principled case
study. In: Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2022). Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer (2022)
28. Christakis, M., Eniser, H.F., Hoffmann, J., Singla, A., Wüstholz, V.: Specify-
ing and testing k-safety properties for machine-learning models (2022), https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2206.06054
29. Cidon, E., Pergament, E., Asgar, Z., Cidon, A., Katti, S.: Characterizing and
taming model instability across edge devices. In: Smola, A., Dimakis, A., Sto-
ica, I. (eds.) Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems. vol. 3, pp. 624–
636 (2021), https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
5190e987c46a346974e351f96997d640-Paper.pdf
30. Coquand, T., Huet, G.: The calculus of constructions. Ph.D. thesis, Inria (1986)
31. Daggitt, M.L., Kokke, W., Atkey, R., Arnaboldi, L., Komendantskya, E.: Ve-
hicle: Interfacing neural network verifiers with interactive theorem provers
(2022).
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2202.05207,
https://arxiv.org/
abs/2202.05207
32. Daggitt, M.L., Kokke, W., Atkey, R., Slusarz, N., Arnaboldi, L., Komendantskaya,
E.: Vehicle: Bridging the embedding gap in the verification of neuro-symbolic
programs. CoRR abs/2401.06379 (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.
2401.06379, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.06379
22
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
33. Daggitt, M.L., Kokke, W., Komendantskaya, E., Atkey, R., Arnaboldi, L., Slusarz,
N., Casadio, M., Coke, B., Lee, J.: The vehicle tutorial: Neural network verification
with vehicle. In: Narodytska, N., Amir, G., Katz, G., Isac, O. (eds.) Proceedings
of the 6th Workshop on Formal Methods for ML-Enabled Autonomous Systems,
FoMLAS@CAV 2023, Paris, France, July 17-18, 2023. Kalpa Publications in Com-
puting, vol. 16, pp. 1–5. EasyChair (2023). https://doi.org/10.29007/5S2X,
https://doi.org/10.29007/5s2x
34. De Maria, E., Bahrami, A., l’Yvonnet, T., Felty, A., Gaffé, D., Ressouche, A.,
Grammont, F.: On the use of formal methods to model and verify neuronal
archetypes. Frontiers of Computer Science 16(3), 1–22 (2022)
35. Demarchi, S., Guidotti, D., Pulina, L., Tacchella, A.: Supporting standardization
of neural networks verification with vnn-lib and coconet. In: 6th Workshop on
Formal Methods for ML-Enabled Autonomous Systems (Jul 2023)
36. Deng, Z., Meng, G., Chen, K., Liu, T., Xiang, L., Chen, C.: Differential testing
of cross deep learning framework APIs: Revealing inconsistencies and vulnerabili-
ties. In: 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23). pp. 7393–
7410. USENIX Association, Anaheim, CA (Aug 2023), https://www.usenix.
org/conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/deng-zizhuang
37. Desmartin, R., Isac, O., Komendantskaya, E., Stark, K., Passmore, G., Katz,
G.: A Certified Proof Checker for Deep Neural Network Verification. In:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10611 (2024)
38. Desmartin, R., Isac, O., Passmore, G.O., Stark, K., Komendantskaya, E., Katz,
G.: Towards a Certified Proof Checker for Deep Neural Network Verification. In:
Glück, R., Kafle, B. (eds.) Logic-Based Program Synthesis and Transformation -
33rd International Symposium, LOPSTR 2023, Cascais, Portugal, October 23-24,
2023, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14330, pp. 198–209.
Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45784-5_13, https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45784-5_13
39. Desmartin, R., Passmore, G.O., Komendantskaya, E., Daggit, M.: Checkinn: Wide
range neural network verification in imandra. In: PPDP 2022: 24th International
Symposium on Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming, Tbilisi, Geor-
gia, September 20 - 22, 2022. pp. 3:1–3:14. ACM (2022). https://doi.org/10.
1145/3551357.3551372, https://doi.org/10.1145/3551357.3551372
40. Dutta, S., Chen, X., Sankaranarayanan, S.: Reachability analysis for neural feed-
back systems using regressive polynomial rule inference. In: ACM International
Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control, HSCC. pp. 157–168
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3302504.3311807
41. Dutta, S., Jha, S., Sankaranarayanan, S., Tiwari, A.: Learning and verification of
feedback control systems using feedforward neural networks. IFAC-PapersOnLine
51(16), 151 – 156 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.08.026,
iFAC Conference on Analysis and Design of Hybrid Systems ADHS 2018
42. Dutta, S., Jha, S., Sankaranarayanan, S., Tiwari, A.: Output range analysis for
deep feedforward neural networks. In: Dutle, A., Muñoz, C., Narkawicz, A. (eds.)
NASA Formal Methods. pp. 121–138. Springer International Publishing, Cham
(2018)
43. Ehlers, R.: Formal verification of piece-wise linear feed-forward neural networks.
In: D’Souza, D., Narayan Kumar, K. (eds.) Automated Technology for Verification
and Analysis. pp. 269–286. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2017)
44. Fan, J., Huang, C., Li, W., Chen, X., Zhu, Q.: Reachnn*: A tool for reachabil-
ity analysis ofneural-network controlled systems. In: International Symposium on
Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis (ATVA) (2020)
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
23
45. Filliâtre, J.C., Paskevich, A.: Why3 - Where Programs Meet Provers. In: Felleisen,
M., Gardner, P. (eds.) Programming Languages and Systems. pp. 125–128. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2013). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-37036-6_8
46. Fischer, M., Balunovic, M., Drachsler-Cohen, D., Gehr, T., Zhang, C., Vechev,
M.T.: DL2: training and querying neural networks with logic. In: Chaudhuri,
K., Salakhutdinov, R. (eds.) Proceedings of the 36th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 97, pp. 1931–1941. PMLR (2019),
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/fischer19a.html
47. Flinkow, T., Pearlmutter, B.A., Monahan, R.: Comparing differentiable logics for
learning with logical constraints (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03847
48. Fremont, D.J., Dreossi, T., Ghosh, S., Yue, X., Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, A.L.,
Seshia, S.A.: Scenic: a language for scenario specification and scene generation. In:
Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation. p. 63–78. PLDI 2019, Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3314221.
3314633
49. Gholami, A., Kim, S., Dong, Z., Yao, Z., Mahoney, M.W., Keutzer, K.: A survey
of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference. In: Low-Power
Computer Vision, pp. 291–326. Chapman and Hall/CRC (2022)
50. Giacobbe, M., Henzinger, T.A., Lechner, M.: How many bits does it take to quan-
tize your neural network? In: Biere, A., Parker, D. (eds.) Tools and Algorithms
for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. pp. 79–97. Springer International
Publishing, Cham (2020)
51. Girard-Satabin, J., Alberti, M., Bobot, F., Chihani, Z., Lemesle, A.: Caisar:
A platform for characterizing artificial intelligence safety and robustness. In:
AISafety. CEUR-Workshop Proceedings, Vienne, Austria (Jul 2022), https:
//hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03687211
52. Giunchiglia, E., Stoian, M.C., Lukasiewicz, T.: Deep learning with logical con-
straints. In: Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI-22). pp. 5478–5485. International Joint Conferences on Artificial In-
telligence Organization (7 2022). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/767,
https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/767, survey Track
53. Giunchiglia, E., Stoian, M.C., Lukasiewicz, T.: Deep learning with logical con-
straints. In: Raedt, L.D. (ed.) Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July
2022. pp. 5478–5485. ijcai.org (2022). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/
767, https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/767
54. Goodfellow, I.J., Shlens, J., Szegedy, C.: Explaining and harnessing adversarial
examples (2015)
55. Gowal, S., Dvijotham, K.D., Stanforth, R., Bunel, R., Qin, C., Uesato, J., Arand-
jelovic, R., Mann, T., Kohli, P.: Scalable verified training for provably robust
image classification. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision. pp. 4842–4851 (2019)
56. Guo, Q., Xie, X., Li, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, Y., Li, X., Shen, C.: Audee: Automated
testing for deep learning frameworks. In: Proceedings of the 35th IEEE/ACM In-
ternational Conference on Automated Software Engineering. p. 486–498. ASE ’20,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2021). https://doi.
org/10.1145/3324884.3416571, https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416571
24
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
57. Hatcliff,
J.,
Leavens,
G.T.,
Leino,
K.R.M.,
Müller,
P.,
Parkinson,
M.:
Behavioral
interface
specification
languages.
ACM
Comput.
Surv.
44(3)
(Jun 2012). https://doi.org/10.1145/2187671.2187678, https://doi.org/
10.1145/2187671.2187678
58. He, Z., Fan, D.: Simultaneously optimizing weight and quantizer of ternary
neural network using truncated gaussian approximation. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
(June 2019)
59. Henzinger, T.A., Lechner, M., Žikelić, Ð.: Scalable verification of quantized neural
networks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. vol. 35,
pp. 3787–3795 (2021)
60. Hitzler, P., Sarker, M.: Neuro-symbolic Artificial Intelligence: The State of the
Art. IOS Press (2022)
61. Huang, C., Fan, J., Chen, X., Li, W., Zhu, Q.: POLAR: A polynomial arithmetic
framework for verifying neural-network controlled systems. In: International Sym-
posium on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis (ATVA) (2022)
62. Huang, C., Fan, J., Li, W., Chen, X., Zhu, Q.: Reachnn: Reachability analysis of
neural-network controlled systems. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing
Systems (TECS) 18(5s), 1–22 (2019)
63. Huang, P., Wu, H., Yang, Y., Daukantas, I., Wu, M., Zhang, Y., Barrett, C.:
Towards efficient verification of quantized neural networks. In: Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 38, pp. 21152–21160 (2024)
64. Huang, X., Kwiatkowska, M., Wang, S., Wu, M.: Safety verification of deep neural
networks (2017)
65. IEEE: Ieee standard for floating-point arithmetic. IEEE Std 754-2019 (Revision
of IEEE 754-2008) pp. 1–84 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.
8766229
66. Isac, O., Barrett, C., Zhang, M., Katz, G.: Neural Network Verification with Proof
Production. In: Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided
Design (FMCAD). pp. 38–48 (2022)
67. Ivanov, R., Carpenter, T., Weimer, J., Alur, R., Pappas, G.J., Lee, I.: Verisig 2.0:
Verification of neural network controllers using taylor model preconditioning. In:
International Conference on Computer-Aided Verification (2021)
68. Ivanov, R., Carpenter, T.J., Weimer, J., Alur, R., Pappas, G.J., Lee, I.: Verifying
the safety of autonomous systems with neural network controllers. ACM Trans.
Embed. Comput. Syst. 20(1) (Dec 2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3419742
69. Ivanov, R., Weimer, J., Alur, R., Pappas, G.J., Lee, I.: Verisig: Verifying safety
properties of hybrid systems with neural network controllers. In: International
Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control. p. 169–178. HSCC,
ACM (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3302504.3311806
70. Jia, K., Rinard, M.: Efficient exact verification of binarized neural networks.
In: Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., Lin, H. (eds.) Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 33, pp. 1782–1795. Curran
Associates, Inc. (2020), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2020/file/1385974ed5904a438616ff7bdb3f7439-Paper.pdf
71. Jia, K., Rinard, M.: Exploiting verified neural networks via floating point numer-
ical error. In: Drăgoi, C., Mukherjee, S., Namjoshi, K. (eds.) Static Analysis. pp.
191–205. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021)
72. Johnson, T.T., Lopez, D.M., Benet, L., Forets, M., Guadalupe, S., Schilling, C.,
Ivanov, R., Carpenter, T.J., Weimer, J., Lee, I.: Arch-comp21 category report:
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
25
Artificial intelligence and neural network control systems (ainncs) for continuous
and hybrid systems plants. In: Frehse, G., Althoff, M. (eds.) 8th International
Workshop on Applied Verification of Continuous and Hybrid Systems (ARCH21).
EPiC Series in Computing, vol. 80, pp. 90–119. EasyChair (2021). https://doi.
org/10.29007/kfk9, https://easychair.org/publications/paper/Jq4h
73. Johnson, T.T., Lopez, D.M., Musau, P., Tran, H.D., Botoeva, E., Leofante,
F., Maleki, A., Sidrane, C., Fan, J., Huang, C.: Arch-comp20 category report:
Artificial intelligence and neural network control systems (ainncs) for contin-
uous and hybrid systems plants. In: Frehse, G., Althoff, M. (eds.) ARCH20.
7th International Workshop on Applied Verification of Continuous and Hy-
brid Systems (ARCH20). EPiC Series in Computing, vol. 74, pp. 107–139.
EasyChair (2020). https://doi.org/10.29007/9xgv, https://easychair.org/
publications/paper/Jvwg
74. Katz, G., Barrett, C., Dill, D.L., Julian, K., Kochenderfer, M.J.: Reluplex: An
efficient smt solver for verifying deep neural networks. In: International conference
on computer aided verification. pp. 97–117. Springer (2017)
75. Katz, G., Huang, D., Ibeling, D., Julian, K., Lazarus, C., Lim, R., Shah, P.,
Thakoor, S., Wu, H., Zeljić, A., Dill, D., Kochenderfer, M., Barrett, C.: The
Marabou Framework for Verification and Analysis of Deep Neural Networks, pp.
443–452 (07 2019)
76. Kochdumper, N., Schilling, C., Althoff, M., Bak, S.: Open- and closed-loop neural
network verification using polynomial zonotopes. In: NASA Formal Methods. pp.
16–36. Springer (2023)
77. Kokke, W., Komendantskaya, E., Kienitz, D., Atkey, R., Aspinall, D.: Neu-
ral networks, secure by construction - an exploration of refinement types.
In: d. S. Oliveira, B.C. (ed.) Programming Languages and Systems - 18th
Asian Symposium, APLAS 2020, Fukuoka, Japan, November 30 - December
2, 2020, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12470, pp. 67–
85. Springer (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64437-6_4, https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64437-6_4
78. Kolter, Z., Madry, A.: Adversarial robustness—theory and practice. NeurIPS 2018
tutorial (2018), available at https://adversarial-ml-tutorial.org/
79. Kolter, Z., Madry, A.: Adversarial robustness: Theory and practice. Tutorial at
NeurIPS p. 3 (2018)
80. Kroening, D., Tautschnig, M.: CBMC–C bounded model checker. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
Systems. pp. 389–391. Springer (2014)
81. Li, Y., Dong, X., Wang, W.: Additive powers-of-two quantization: An effi-
cient non-uniform discretization for neural networks. In: International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (2020), https://openreview.net/forum?id=
BkgXT24tDS
82. Lohar, D., Jeangoudoux, C., Volkova, A., Darulova, E.: Sound mixed fixed-point
quantization of neural networks. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst. 22(5s) (sep
2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3609118, https://doi.org/10.1145/3609118
83. Lopez, D.M., Althoff, M., Benet, L., Chen, X., Fan, J., Forets, M., Huang, C.,
Johnson, T.T., Ladner, T., Li, W., Schilling, C., Zhu, Q.: Arch-comp22 cate-
gory report: Artificial intelligence and neural network control systems (ainncs)
for continuous and hybrid systems plants. In: Frehse, G., Althoff, M., Schoitsch,
E., Guiochet, J. (eds.) Proceedings of 9th International Workshop on Applied Ver-
ification of Continuous and Hybrid Systems (ARCH22). EPiC Series in Comput-
26
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
ing, vol. 90, pp. 142–184. EasyChair (2022). https://doi.org/10.29007/wfgr,
https://easychair.org/publications/paper/C1J8
84. Lopez, D.M., Althoff, M., Forets, M., Johnson, T.T., Ladner, T., Schilling, C.:
Arch-comp23 category report: Artificial intelligence and neural network control
systems (ainncs) for continuous and hybrid systems plants. In: Frehse, G., Althoff,
M. (eds.) Proceedings of 10th International Workshop on Applied Verification of
Continuous and Hybrid Systems (ARCH23). EPiC Series in Computing, vol. 96,
pp. 89–125. EasyChair (2023). https://doi.org/10.29007/x38n
85. Lopez, D.M., Choi, S.W., Tran, H.D., Johnson, T.T.: NNV 2.0: The neural net-
work verification tool. In: Enea, C., Lal, A. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification.
pp. 397–412. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2023)
86. Lopez, D.M., Musau, P., Tran, H.D., Dutta, S., Carpenter, T.J., Ivanov, R.,
Johnson, T.T.: Arch-comp19 category report: Artificial intelligence and neural
network control systems (ainncs) for continuous and hybrid systems plants. In:
Frehse, G., Althoff, M. (eds.) ARCH19. 6th International Workshop on Ap-
plied Verification of Continuous and Hybrid Systems. EPiC Series in Comput-
ing, vol. 61, pp. 103–119. EasyChair (2019). https://doi.org/10.29007/rgv8,
https://easychair.org/publications/paper/BFKs
87. Madry, A., Makelov, A., Schmidt, L., Tsipras, D., Vladu, A.: Towards deep learn-
ing models resistant to adversarial attacks. In: International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations (2018)
88. Magalhães, J.W.d.S., Woodruff, J., Polgreen, E., O’Boyle, M.F.P.: C2taco: Lift-
ing tensor code to taco. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGPLAN Inter-
national Conference on Generative Programming: Concepts and Experiences.
p. 42–56. GPCE 2023, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA (2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3624007.3624053, https://doi.org/
10.1145/3624007.3624053
89. Mandal, U., Amir, G., Wu, H., Daukantas, I., Newell, F.L., Ravaioli, U.J.,
Meng, B., Durling, M., Ganai, M., Shim, T., Katz, G., Barrett, C.W.: Formally
verifying deep reinforcement learning controllers with lyapunov barrier certifi-
cates. CoRR abs/2405.14058 (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2405.
14058, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.14058
90. Manhaeve, R., Dumančić, S., Kimmig, A., Demeester, T., De Raedt, L.:
Neural
probabilistic
logic
programming
in
deepproblog.
Artificial
Intelli-
gence
298,
103504
(2021).
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
artint.2021.103504,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0004370221000552
91. Manino, E., Menezes, R.S., Shmarov, F., Cordeiro, L.C.: NeuroCodeBench: a
Plain C Neural Network Benchmark for Software Verification. In: Workshop on
Automated Formal Reasoning for Trustworthy AI Systems (2023)
92. Matos, J.B.P., de Lima Filho, E.B., Bessa, I., Manino, E., Song, X., Cordeiro, L.C.:
Counterexample guided neural network quantization refinement. IEEE Transac-
tions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 43(4), 1121–
1134 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2023.3335313
93. Menezes, R.S., Aldughaim, M., Farias, B., Li, X., Manino, E., Shmarov, F., Song,
K., Brauße, F., Gadelha, M.R., Tihanyi, N., Korovin, K., Cordeiro, L.C.: Esbmc
v7.4: Harnessing the power of intervals. In: Finkbeiner, B., Kovács, L. (eds.)
Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. pp. 376–380.
Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2024)
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
27
94. Mistry, S., Saha, I., Biswas, S.: An milp encoding for efficient verification of quan-
tized deep neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of In-
tegrated Circuits and Systems 41(11), 4445–4456 (2022). https://doi.org/10.
1109/TCAD.2022.3197697
95. Murphy, C., Gray, P., Stewart, G.: Verified perceptron convergence theorem.
In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine
Learning and Programming Languages. pp. 43–50 (2017)
96. Müller, M.N., Eckert, F., Fischer, M., Vechev, M.: Certified training: Small boxes
are all you need (2023)
97. Narodytska, N., Kasiviswanathan, S., Ryzhyk, L., Sagiv, M., Walsh, T.: Verify-
ing properties of binarized deep neural networks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 32 (2018)
98. Odena, A., Olsson, C., Andersen, D., Goodfellow, I.: TensorFuzz: Debugging neu-
ral networks with coverage-guided fuzzing. In: Chaudhuri, K., Salakhutdinov, R.
(eds.) Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 97, pp. 4901–4911. PMLR (09–
15 Jun 2019), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/odena19a.html
99. Payani, A., Fekri, F.: Inductive Logic Programming via Differentiable Deep Neural
Logic Networks. Tech. rep. (Jun 2019). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.
03523, http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03523, zSCC: 0000039 arXiv:1906.03523 [cs]
type: article
100. Pham, H.V., Qian, S., Wang, J., Lutellier, T., Rosenthal, J., Tan, L., Yu, Y.,
Nagappan, N.: Problems and opportunities in training deep learning software
systems: an analysis of variance. In: Proceedings of the 35th IEEE/ACM Inter-
national Conference on Automated Software Engineering. p. 771–783. ASE ’20,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2021). https://doi.
org/10.1145/3324884.3416545, https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416545
101. Prach, B., Brau, F., Buttazzo, G., Lampert, C.H.: 1-lipschitz layers compared:
Memory speed and certifiable robustness. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 24574–24583
(June 2024)
102. Pulina, L., Tacchella, A.: An abstraction-refinement approach to verification of
artificial neural networks. In: Touili, T., Cook, B., Jackson, P. (eds.) Computer
Aided Verification. pp. 243–257. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg
(2010)
103. Qin, H., Gong, R., Liu, X., Bai, X., Song, J., Sebe, N.: Binary neu-
ral
networks:
A
survey.
Pattern
Recognition
105,
107281
(2020).
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2020.107281,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320320300856
104. Sälzer, M., Lange, M.: Reachability Is NP-Complete Even for the Simplest Neural
Networks. In: Proc. 15th Int. Conf. on Reachability Problems (RP). pp. 149–164
(2021)
105. Schlögl, A., Hofer, N., Böhme, R.: Causes and effects of unanticipated nu-
merical deviations in neural network inference frameworks. In: Oh, A., Nau-
mann, T., Globerson, A., Saenko, K., Hardt, M., Levine, S. (eds.) Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 36, pp. 56095–56107. Curran
Associates, Inc. (2023), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2023/file/af076c3bdbf935b81d808e37c5ede463-Paper-Conference.pdf
106. Seshia, S.A., Sadigh, D., Sastry, S.S.: Toward verified artificial intelligence. Com-
mun. ACM 65(7), 46–55 (Jun 2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3503914
28
L. C. Cordeiro et al.
107. Shriver, D., Elbaum, S., Dwyer, M.B.: DNNV: A framework for deep neural net-
work verification. In: Silva, A., Leino, K.R.M. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification.
pp. 137–150. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021)
108. Sibidanov, A., Zimmermann, P., Glondu, S.: The core-math project. In: 2022
IEEE 29th Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH). pp. 26–34 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ARITH54963.2022.00014
109. Sidrane, C., Kochenderfer, M.J.: OVERT: Verification of nonlinear dynamical
systems with neural network controllers via overapproximation. Safe Machine
Learning workshop at ICLR (2019)
110. Singh, G., Gehr, T., Püschel, M., Vechev, M.: An abstract domain for certifying
neural networks. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 3(POPL),
1–30 (2019)
111. Slusarz, N., Komendantskaya, E., Daggitt, M.L., Stewart, R.J., Stark, K.: Logic of
differentiable logics: Towards a uniform semantics of DL. In: Piskac, R., Voronkov,
A. (eds.) LPAR 2023: Proceedings of 24th International Conference on Logic for
Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, Manizales, Colombia, 4-9th
June 2023. EPiC Series in Computing, vol. 94, pp. 473–493. EasyChair (2023).
https://doi.org/10.29007/C1NT, https://doi.org/10.29007/c1nt
112. Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I.,
Fergus, R.: Intriguing properties of neural networks (2014)
113. Tassarotti, J., Tristan, J.B.: Verified density compilation for a probabilistic pro-
gramming language. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7(PLDI) (Jun 2023). https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3591245, https://doi.org/10.1145/3591245
114. Teuber, S., Büning, M.K., Kern, P., Sinz, C.: Geometric path enumeration for
equivalence verification of neural networks. In: 2021 IEEE 33rd International
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI). pp. 200–208 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTAI52525.2021.00035
115. Teuber, S., Mitsch, S., Platzer, A.: Provably safe neural network controllers via
differential dynamic logic. CoRR abs/2402.10998 (2024). https://doi.org/10.
48550/ARXIV.2402.10998, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.10998
116. Tran, H.D., Xiang, W., Johnson, T.T.: Verification approaches for learning-
enabled autonomous cyber–physical systems. IEEE Design & Test 39(1), 24–34
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/MDAT.2020.3015712
117. Tran, H.D., Yang, X., Lopez, D.M., Musau, P., Nguyen, L.V., Xiang, W., Bak,
S., Johnson, T.T.: NNV: The neural network verification tool for deep neural net-
works and learning-enabled cyber-physical systems. In: 32nd International Con-
ference on Computer-Aided Verification (CAV’20) (7 2020)
118. Wang, N., Choi, J., Brand, D., Chen, C.Y., Gopalakrishnan, K.: Training
deep neural networks with 8-bit floating point numbers. In: Bengio, S., Wal-
lach, H., Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Garnett, R. (eds.)
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 31. Curran As-
sociates, Inc. (2018), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2018/file/335d3d1cd7ef05ec77714a215134914c-Paper.pdf
119. Wang, S., Zhang, H., Xu, K., Lin, X., Jana, S., Hsieh, C.J., Kolter, J.Z.: Beta-
crown: Efficient bound propagation with per-neuron split constraints for neural
network robustness verification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 34, 29909–29921 (2021)
120. Wu, H., Isac, O., Zeljic, A., Tagomori, T., Daggitt, M.L., Kokke, W., Refaeli,
I., Amir, G., Julian, K., Bassan, S., Huang, P., Lahav, O., Wu, M., Zhang, M.,
Komendantskaya, E., Katz, G., Barrett, C.W.: Marabou 2.0: A Versatile Formal
Analyzer of Neural Networks. In: Computer Aided Verification (CAV) (2024)
NN Verification is a PL Challenge
29
121. Wu, H., Zeljić, A., Katz, G., Barrett, C.: Efficient neural network analysis with
sum-of-infeasibilities. In: International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for
the Construction and Analysis of Systems. pp. 143–163. Springer (2022)
122. Xiang, W., Tran, H.D., Johnson, T.T.: Output reachable set estimation and ver-
ification for multilayer neural networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks
and learning systems 29(11), 5777–5783 (2018)
123. Xie, X., Kersting, K., Neider, D.: Neuro-symbolic verification of deep neural net-
works. In: Raedt, L.D. (ed.) Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22. pp. 3622–3628. International Joint
Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization (7 2022). https://doi.org/
10.24963/ijcai.2022/503, https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/503, main
Track
124. Yao, P., Wu, H., Gao, B., Tang, J., Zhang, Q., Zhang, W., Yang, J.J., Qian,
H.: Fully hardware-implemented memristor convolutional neural network. Nature
577(7792), 641–646 (2020)
125. Zhang, H., Chen, H., Xiao, C., Gowal, S., Stanforth, R., Li, B., Boning, D., Hsieh,
C.J.: Towards stable and efficient training of verifiably robust neural networks.
In: 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020 (2020)
126. Zhang, Y., Song, F., Sun, J.: Qebverif: Quantization error bound verification
of neural networks. In: Enea, C., Lal, A. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification. pp.
413–437. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2023)
127. Zhang, Y., Albarghouthi, A., D’Antoni, L.: Robustness to programmable string
transformations via augmented abstract training. In: Proceedings of the 37th
International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 11023–11032 (2020)
128. Zhuang, D., Zhang, X., Song, S., Hooker, S.: Randomness in neural network
training: Characterizing the impact of tooling. In: Marculescu, D., Chi, Y.,
Wu, C. (eds.) Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems. vol. 4, pp. 316–
336 (2022), https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
427e0e886ebf87538afdf0badb805b7f-Paper.pdf
129. Zombori, D., Bánhelyi, B., Csendes, T., Megyeri, I., Jelasity, M.: Fooling a com-
plete neural network verifier. In: International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (2021), https://openreview.net/forum?id=4IwieFS44l
