A NOVEL DATATYPE ARCHITECTURE SUPPORT FOR 
PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES  
Mehran Alidoost Nia and Reza Ebrahimi Atani 
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Guilan, P.O. Box 3756, Rasht, Iran. 
alidoost@msc.guilan.ac.ir, rebrahimi@guilan.ac.ir 
ABSTRACT 
In programmers  point of view, Datatypes in programming language level have a simple  description but 
inside hardware, huge machine codes are responsible to describe type features. Datatype architecture 
design is a novel approach to match programming features along with hardware design. In this paper a 
novel Data type-Based Code Reducer (TYPELINE) architecture is proposed and implemented according 
to significant data types (SDT) of programming languages. TYPELINE uses TEUs for processing 
various SDT operations. This architecture design leads to reducing the number of machine codes, and 
increases execution speed, and also improves some parallelism level. This is because this architecture 
supports some operation for the execution of Abstract Data Types in parallel. Also it ensures to 
maintain data type features and entire application level specifications using the proposed type 
conversion unit. This framework includes compiler level identifying execution modes and memory 
management unit for decreasing object read/write in heap memory by ISA support. This energy-efficient 
architecture is completely compatible with object oriented programming languages and in combination 
mode it can process complex C++ data structures with respect to parallel TYPELINE architecture 
support. 
KEYWORDS 
Significant Data Type, Programing Language, dark Silicon, implementation, ISA,    
1. INTRODUCTION 
In today's world, programing languages such as Java apply advance data types to increase the flexibility 
in software implementations. In the other hand, when it comes to hardware design there are several 
difficulties which does not let the designers to follow a fruit full implementation. It is hard to train 
computers, understand all aspects of programming languages. It comes from high level perspectives in 
programming tools and also is related to low level design in computer architecture. This 
misunderstanding between programming languages and computer architecture needs an interface for 
interpretation which leads to complicated design architecture. In order to solve this problem, we can use 
some specifications of programming languages which helps improving the hardware ability of 
understanding codes and a clear and easier execution. 
Datatype-based architecture effects on some current issues in computer design. Energy efficient 
architecture design, reducing execution time, increasing overall speed, some parallelism level and also 
object oriented support are some aspects of type-based architecture improvements. Prior works in these 
areas come from different ideas. Conservation core, Greendroid project, dual voltage in Truffle 
architecture to support approximate programming and Green framework are previous works on energy 
efficient architecture design [1, 2, 3, 4]. Also ICER is implemented respect to Code reduction technique 
to reduce energy consumption [5, 6]. Object oriented architectures are focused on object management in 
heap memory and increase speed of memory allocation by using compaction algorithms to handle object 
memory update [7, 8]. Compiler support is needed to carry out instruction level parallelism and static 
reordering. For instance Enerj compiler is provided to determine approximate-aware regions and LLVM 
compiler that completely support object oriented programming optimization [9, 10]. Parallelism tools in 
code level support efficient implementation of parallel execution and include some specifications of 
code regions that can help the term of parallelism. We should know what region of codes are more 
deserved to support. Parkour and Kremlin are previous works on this area [11, 12].  
Datatypes have significant advantages that make us moving toward datatype-based architecture 
design. One of the most important properties is to reduce type annotation. Before this, an approach 
called TAL was used for providing security in programming language level. Type assembly maps all 
different datatypes into a unique datatype template which is defined for security reasons. It wasted 
compiling time in several steps hence iTALX is derived from TAL which reduces a large number of 
code caused by type annotations [13, 14]. Mentioned effects are useful in memory management design 
and release occupied dynamic memory. Also store operations and memory management can be 
improved by using datatype architectures. ADI instruction that is defined according to datatype and is 
tested under oracle and some other storing environment is led to reduce energy consumption [15]. In 
object oriented programming languages like C++, it is efficient to build specific object file. This can 
help us to improve performance of the execution code and increases ability to adapt with new 
architecture design. ELF-like object file is completely sufficient [16, 17]. 
In this paper we focus on data type features in programming languages that is needed to support 
through architecture design. In practice, most of datatypes are common among languages due to code 
behaviour. Dividing design space into specific regions relevant to datatype features leads to increase 
process speed, improve parallelism and also reduce overall energy consumption in some cases. Each 
datatype has its own privacy and data management and this is equivalent to object concepts in object 
oriented programming and implementation of advanced programming languages. But still a challenge is 
remained. What datatypes should be chosen to implement through TYPLINE architecture? We answer 
to this essential question after type analysis process. However application specific platforms with their 
homogenous datatypes are more compatible, but in this paper we are trying to obtain TYPELINE 
performance on general benchmarks in parallelism, speedup and also energy-efficiency. This helps us to 
understand real targets of this architecture and also identify hot regions to implement. 
The rest of the paper is structured as below: In section two a brief overview of datatype architecture is 
presented. Datatypes in different applications are analysed in section three and in section four 
TYPELINE, a novel datatype-based architecture is introduced. The evaluation results of the architecture 
are presented in section five and we will have a comparison with other related architectures in section 
six. Finally the paper concludes in section seven. 
Data types are the best target to cluster operations into specific regions. Boundaries between these 
regions should be determined by type of operations. The leverage of Datatypes comes from 
programming languages approaches to identify operation types. Datatype architecture idea is behind 
programming languages behaviour against types of data and also types of operations. So it is strongly 
connected to programing language scope. Conceptions like heap memory, objects, linker, static and 
dynamic type checking, method signatures and related topics should be considered in architecture 
design.  
    As shown in Figure1, we faced to equivalent conceptions in programming and hardware level. To 
completely support language level abstractions, it is needed to know programming language scopes and 
its level of cooperation among other units like operating systems and main hardware units. 
 
 
Figure1: Programming language scope versus hardware scope is shown in this figure. Heap memory in 
programming language scope should be mapped into object cache in TYPELINE mode in hardware level. 
1.1. 
Design Steps 
Datatype architecture is consisting of some process lines that in special situations can be executed as 
parallel. It is responsible for running typical datatype operation is a processor unit. The main idea of this 
architecture design is to map language level feature in hardware level to reduce size of codes and also 
annotation needed for description and support abstraction data types (ADT) to run simultaneously as 
much as possible. In this architecture each datatype is executed in its own process line and operation 
support is related to the same datatype. However according to current situations, it is not possible to 
dedicate design space to all datatypes in parallel, but it will be shown that correct election of target 
datatypes can be improved process speed and parallelism levels. It is important how to divide design 
space. It must be cleared that how many silicon space should be dedicated to specific datatype. For 
example if floating point operations have more frequency in comparison with integer, it is clear that we 
should dedicate more design resources to that. 
First step is to find most important datatypes with respect to operations that should be executed. This 
step is explained in the next section that needed statistical analysis in general benchmarks. After 
identifying target datatypes, it’s time to specify design regions. In this paper we are trying to use four 
most important datatypes that can be run and work together simultaneously. In paralleling design space, 
one of the problems is power consumption. It seems very critical to handle all paralleled stages with the 
same acceptable power. For example if we have a power source with 80W, overall power requirement to 
trigger all parallel units must not exceed 80W. As mentioned, each process line can work independently 
or parallel in cooperation with other lines. So it is needed to propose an instruction set (ISA) for 
architecture support. Each line has its own data and logical operation instruction and in some special 
modes, process lines can be reconfigured with respect to the current execution mode. Also this 
framework requires compiler static support to determine which code regions should be executed in 
which process line and absolutely identifies current execution mode. One of basic features of this 
instruction set is memory management instructions. It is common among all process lines and is focused 
on object file management that should be new and delete along with program running. This instructions 
can help to reduce amount of memory space usage during program execution. In addition, it can be 
considered as architecture support for object oriented languages that enhances entire performance in 
memory and cache level. 
Next, we need datatype features and operation needed that to be implemented. In architecture design 
space, we should emphasis on language features. Type behavior in every typical language is very near 
but for better analysis, in this paper is focused on C++ language feature and all descriptions are 
completely compatible with this.  
1.2. 
Type Measurement 
Another concept that should be explained is to introduce a measurement for determining type of 
operations. This measurement is related to method signatures in language level. During type checking 
process in compiler level, type consistency is checked and type conversion that are performed. The here, 
all inputs and outputs for operations, methods, objects and other executive units are determined. So it 
should be decided that current operation must be executed in which process line. Method signatures are 
the main resource for specifying true process line. Assume that we have a heterogonous type operation 
including char, integer and floating point. After type conversion process, final method signature for 
entire operation chooses as float. Although the correct answer is clear with respect to C++ standard 
compilers, but as a standard rule, method signatures should be responsible for determining type of 
operations.   
 
Float = float * char * integer (star is a sample operation) 
1.3. 
Process Lines and TEU 
Process lines are the main part of datatype architectures. After detecting type of operations in static code 
analysis, it’s time to direct them to the correct process line. Each process line leads to specific datatype 
unit called TEU (Type Execution Unit). Here can be performed single operations or parallel operations 
in cooperation with other process lines. Parallel mode should be determined in compilation time and 
cluster these operations into first logical unit. 
As shown in Figure 2, in datatype architecture design we are trying to decompose entire operations 
into clusters that can be supported by TEUs. After statistical analysis and design steps, datatypes 
including B, D, A and G are chosen as the most significant datatypes. Green circles indicate these 
datatypes. Blue circles is some ADTs, structures, methods and functions that are constructed of the 
significant datatypes. These datatypes are the main target for parallel execution. In Figure 2-b the 
parallelism is shown by connected lines between two or three process line that ended to the TEUs. Other 
remaining datatypes could be handled in two ways. First is to use traditional processor as a secondary 
process line to handle other datatypes. Second is to convert all datatypes into significant datatypes that 
TEUs are enabling to run them. This conversion can be done by Type Conversion Unit that is discussed 
in section four. 
Resources are assigned to process with respect to type value. In the other word, process lines that are 
responsible for frequent type operations need a lot of design space and also more computer resources. 
Datatype B with blue colour is the most significant in comparison with others. Consequently it is 
deserved to have more design space and first class priority in running. In this figure, when we move 
from first process line to the last one, congestion of related operations in process lines will be decreased. 
This is the direct result of similar operations and choosing correct implementation. 
Assume that an ADT is constructed of three important datatypes including B, D and A. when 
datatypes in an ADT are heterogonous and behave uniformly, we can propagate execution through 
available process lines that are provided here. So according to Figure 2, in the first layer near TEUs, 
three datatype B, D and A are connected together by  vertical line. This is because in logical state these 
three separated datatypes comprise single ADT and in this architecture can be executed simultaneously. 
This shows the parallelism feature in datatype architecture design. If the number of these features 
enhance, performance will be increased. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 2: Datatype architecture design steps. (a) It shows the first step including cluster of current datatypes in 
execution code. This step is static datatype ordering. (b) It indicates operation execution handling according to 
datatype support and also shows complex dynamic datatype decomposition simultaneously. (English alphabets are 
equivalent to datatypes) 
 
1.4. 
Datatypes and Code Dependency 
One of the most important issues in parallelism is the code dependency. It is behind dependency 
between related codes with common variables. In view of datatypes, the only measurement to separate 
operations and make a boundary, is the type of operations. When we are moving toward datatype 
approaches, it is more important to know about datatype behavior and structure in various situations. 
Data structure elements are more independent than others. It comes from data records that are define in a 
specific data structure and often are declared to show independent elements of a record. For example it 
is very rarely to define x variant in data structure and also define x2. Even this happens, this variants are 
initialized together. 
This theory is a strong reason to use datatype as a basic measurement to category process lines. 
Generally using datatype features to cluster process lines causes that code dependency is decreased 
sensitively and also it reinforces instruction level parallelism. A datatype is responsible to manage its 
own data and variable values and it is completely equivalent to object theory [18]. Objects have their 
own private data and this provides object oriented support availability. These concepts are discussed in 
section six. 
2. SDT Selection 
It is important to know that how to divide design space into useful regions. When applications become 
more heterogonous, the election of true design space will be more difficult [19]. These regions are given 
by statistical analysis, especially on hot code regions. In this section we are going to see experimental 
result behind codes. Code level includes standard C++ benchmark which is shown in Table1. We have 
tried to collect features related to implementation steps and compilation time which are important to 
determine exact hardware design. For this reason some benchmarks were selected through useful and 
common applications in different aspects of implementation including various arithmetic and logic 
operations that have been used by popular datatypes. 
2.1. 
Datatype Analysis 
Our goal is to find Significant Datatypes (SDT) through common applications. This step is required to 
know more details about implementation features of data types and statistical results of these features 
during execution time and code structure in native code side. Then we will show that significant data 
types based on some specific features related to programming languages features have a limited 
members. It means that SDTs in various implementations will be constant and stable than overall 
application features. After specifying SDTs, it is needed to identify special effect of data types on 
architecture design. We are going to approve that using SDTs in design steps which leads to increase the 
overall execution performance especially when the number of loop counter grows fast. For example in 
operating systems that one or more specific routines will be executed several times in an endless loop, 
datatype architecture is the best solution. But it should be noticed that in various platforms selecting 
SDTs will be different. For example in Windows OS we are faced to integer family like long, short and 
etc. Features like this leads to design interactive architectures that can be worked across programming 
language cooperation. 
 
Table 1: Standard Benchmark for Type Analysis 
Title 
Description 
Astar 
Path finding algorithm 
Btree 
Binary tree indexing routines 
Fss 
Fast SAT  Solver 
Fft 
Fast Fourier Transform  
Viterbi 
The basic Viterbi decoder operation, called a "butterfly" 
Raytracer 
3D image renderer 
 
Selecting best SDTs depends on two important factors. As shown in Figure 3(a), number of datatype 
repetition and according to Figure 3(c), number of program loops will be crucial in SDT choosing steps. 
Number of repetitions should be most important because they consist of large number of datatypes in 
program execution. It shows in Figure 3(b) as avg columns. 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 3: Operational datatype analysis. (a, b) Show datatype operation frequencies in benchmarks. (c, d) Indicate 
operation features according to code behaviour including loops, conditions, static operations, constants, unsigned 
and array operations. (The value of the arrows is raised respectively by colour order red, yellow and green)  
Average number of the entire data type repetitions represents importance level of a specific datatype. 
But in choosing steps we need more exact parameters. It is because hardware implementation of these 
datatypes leads to spend design cost of use. Then we must quietly careful in selecting SDT procedure. 
Hence we follow a complementary factor that can help to make a better decision. This factor is related to 
data type features. Figure 3(c, d) indicates statistics of data type features according to standard 
benchmarks. 
2.2. 
Operational Type Features 
When it comes to program codes, the first and most important feature in program codes is loop 
repetitions. Datatypes have a fixed number in each program. But we should attend to datatype operations 
through loops. Loops will be multiply data type power in programming languages. Consider a program 
with repetition of 1000 times in a loop with 2 data types and another program without any loop with 100 
of the same data type. It is clear that first program is more powerful in datatype level. Datatypes that are 
repeated in loop environment are our target for SDT. Priority of data type selection for hardware 
implementation is related to the same data type features. Notice that green arrows in Figure 3(c) show 
power of targets in comparison with yellow and red arrows. 
Other features like conditions, tell us to focus on logical operations in architecture design. Static 
feature indicates values that should be more stable in heap and cache memory during execution time. 
Method signatures that have specific input datatypes and also have a specific output datatype that have a 
static feature are targets for object cache modelling. Also const and unsigned features can be 
implemented in hardware level as a feature and reduces number of type annotations according to their 
frequencies. 
2.3. 
Array Operations 
As shown in Figure 3, number of array data operations is impressive and also according to benchmark 
codes, most of them are in loop chains. After brief review in statistics that are shown in figure 3(c, d), it 
is clear that we should design the entire architecture with respect to array datatype support. It is because 
of the number of array operations in datatype features. Large number of operations is forced us to 
choose arrays as a SDT feature. 
As a conclusion of this section, some of these datatypes is selected as SDT. These SDTs include 
integer, float, double and char. This selection is respect to type analysis and operational features that 
completely described in this section. It should be remembered that we are used general benchmarks, 
hence the result of datatypes is so vast. This approach is used for general purpose designs that should 
work in different situations. But choosing application specific targets are more useful and leads to 
receiving smooth results. This unification can increase performance very fast. Consider that we want to 
design a datatype architecture for DNS servers. DNS servers have a specific data template for exchange 
queries between users. This unification should be clearer where the special duty of target architecture is 
to compute and translate one million queries every day. When datatypes are in a unique template under 
DNS operations, it can handles more queries by process lines and also can be more focused on 
parallelism issues. Absolutely DNS datatype architecture design is more effective than general purpose 
architecture. So if execution codes are smoother, performance of the datatype architecture will be 
improved. 
3. TYPELINE 
Process line idea plus according to datatype theory leads to design a novel datatype architecture called 
TYPELINE. In this section we are going to explain TYPELINE features and its functionalities in 
detailed. Preliminaries and important issues in datatype architecture was described in two previous 
sections. So far, significant concepts in programming language scopes, process line idea, datatype 
theory, parallelism issues and high performance datatype architectures are described. It is indicated how 
to dedicate better design space according to datatypes. The procedure include detecting SDTs is 
mentioned and here we should use these important features that are extracted from operational code 
analysis steps. 
Now we want to discuss about design steps in two important subsections. The first part is the 
implementation of TYPELINE architecture with respect to SDTs and code analysis and the second part 
is, memory operations and consequently issues related to object memory management. Through these 
steps, special ISA for this architecture design according to Alpha instruction set is proposed. This 
instruction set supports critical memory operations and designs with respect to each SDT features. Also 
control path of TYPELINE should be reviewed. 
3.1. 
TYPELINE Architecture Design 
A significant procedure is related to static code ordering. To handle this step, an appropriate compiler 
framework is needed to determine code regions that should be transferred to the correct process line. In 
this process execution mode is identified and C++ codes are translated according to proposed ISA. This 
step is completely static and codes have only limited dynamic availability. So process lines of the 
TYPELINE are equivalent to in-order pipeline and its behavior is similar to it. The dynamic availability 
is beyond configuration of some control states that can be changed execution mode and type features. As 
mentioned in previous sections, code dependencies in static analysis will be determined and parallel 
execution through various process lines is related to datatype of operations. With respect to type of 
operations, it will be really simple to configure process lines during execution time. Type conversion is 
also available in both static and dynamic state but it should be handled in static level. Dynamic datatype 
conversion is only because some of acceleration in execution time, should be applied that can improve 
overall speed of TYPELINE architecture. 
As shown in Figure 4, TYPELINE consists of four process lines that can work independent or 
simultaneously. This number is because of four SDTs that extracted in type analysis step. Each process 
line begins with register files and ends to one TEU. Each register file includes 32 registers according to 
the same type features that can be loaded by control bits in two different modes. First is the single mode 
and another is array mode. In array mode, from 1 to 16 concurrent operation can be done by TEU.  
After the operation accomplished, it is time to store results. Results can be write back to register files 
for future related operations or store in the memory. This transfer is done by global data path that 
responsible for data exchanges. The overall architecture is designed in a way that process lines will not 
be idle or sparse. We are tried to do best selections in type of operations. 
TEUs are dedicated to four SDTs respectively integer, float, double and char. For design space issue 
division operation is skipped and it handles classically. Also in TEU 4 that is assigned to char 
operations, only sum, subtraction and logical operation is supported. This is because in char operations 
or string-related processes we are involving to comparison and logical operations instead of computation 
operations. The functionalities of each TEU unit is completely explained in ISA subsection.  
Exceptional operations or rare functions that are not support in these four process lines can be handled 
in two ways. First is to convert them by type conversions and then run across process lines and second is 
to use a complementary classic computation units that supports traditional machine codes. In this project 
we are chosen the second solution. This selection is because first solution will be led to data lose in type 
conversion processes and also reduce overall operational performance of the entire architecture. So this 
is wisely to use traditional support as secondary process handling. This act is important where it is more 
significant to ensure process reliability. For any reason, if type processing is failed, it ensures that 
process will be accomplished. 
Due to the constraints of power budget, it is reasonably to economize design space by choosing correct 
computation and logical units in TEUs. The main assumption about power source is that we have 80W 
power for providing entire energy consumption. According to dark silicon problem we faced to power 
constraints for thermal reasons [20]. It is clear that we have not wide choices. Consider 300 mm2 design 
space under 90 nm TSMC technology. For using all transistors in this area, it is required approximately 
445W [1]. But in this situations only about 18% of design space can be used with 80W power budget. 
So in parallel computational architecture it is very important to attend to these limitations. Another 
solution is to use low-power techniques to reduce overall energy consumption that are more common in 
synthesizable architectures and can be used during implementation steps [21]. Design optimization 
seems very necessary during implementation procedure. This feature can robust the entire performance 
of TYPELINE. 
 
 
Figure 4: An overview of TYPELINE architecture 
 
3.2. 
Instruction Set Architecture 
As explained it is necessary to have special instructions for each of TEUs according to type of 
operations. So we are proposed instructions needed due to Alpha ISA [22]. The instructions are provided 
in Table 2. It refers to previous sections that we are mentioned conventional part of processing should be 
handled by traditional instructions under Alpha architecture.  
As shown in Table 2, instructions are divided into 6 categories. The first four groups are related to 
operations that can support same datatype. Also it should be noticed that in popular datatypes like 
integer, more design space is dedicated and consequently the number of instruction support is higher 
than other datatypes. Although in integer datatype is emphasized on both arithmetic and logical 
operations but in double and float datatype is attended to arithmetic and finally char datatype operations 
are included comparison and logical instructions. These instructions are extracted due to datatype 
analysis in section three and are proposed to support datatype functionalities according to its operational 
behaviors. 
It is time to explain control instructions. With respect to TYPELINE architecture, it is required to 
determine whether we want to use vector mode for parallel purposes. VEN (Vector Enabled) and VDS 
(Vector Disable) instruction is used to change between single and vector load in register files and also 
determine operations should be executed single or parallel in the same TEU. It configures these four 
control bits. Also it is possible to enable or disable process lines manually. Only integer datatype 
operations are protected. These availabilities are because in some situations we want to focus on single 
or double datatype operations or critical computations that are needed to execute reliably. The 
instruction include FTEN, DBEN, CHEN, FTDS, DBDS and CHDS are provided for supporting these 
features. CONV instruction is proposed to configure type conversion unit manually. It configures by 8 
length binary string that each bit of it indicates one type conversion state. Type conversions can be 
applied to 8 convertor with respect to 8 control bits. But according to type constraints in TYPELINE 
architecture, only three type conversion switch is performed that are responsible for integer to float, 
integer to double and float to double conversion. From reserved switches can be used to enhance 
performance of processing. For example if we want to process a heavy array, it can be divided into other 
process line. It is possible only with type conversion unit. 
PEN instruction puts execution control in parallel mode. Every codes that come after this instruction, 
can be executed simultaneously according to their process lines. This mode is used to support ADT and 
user defined datatypes and objects. After entire process is done, in should be disabled by PDS 
instruction. 
 
Table 2: Proposed instruction set for TYPELINE. 
Category 
Instructions 
integer 
LD.in, ST.in, MOV.in, ADD.in, SUB.in, MUL.in, DIV.in, CMPE.in, CMPEG.in, 
CMPES.in, CMPS.in, AND.in, OR.in, XOR.in, NOR.in, XNOR.in, SRA.in, 
SRL.in 
float 
LD.ft, ST.ft, MOV.ft, ADD.ft, SUB.ft, MUL.ft, DIV.ft, CMP.ft 
double 
LD.db, ST.db, MOV.db, ADD.db, SUB.db, MUL.db, CMP.db 
char 
LD.ch, ST.ch, MOV.ch, ADD.ch, SUB.ch, CMPE.ch, CMPEG.ch, CMPES.ch, 
CMPS.ch, AND.ch, OR.ch, XOR.ch, NOR.ch, XNOR.ch 
Control  
VEN, VDS, PEN, PDS, FTEN, DBEN, CHEN, FTDS, DBDS, CHDS, CONV 
Memory 
OBJ.n, OBJ.r 
 
 
Object oriented architectures have their own dynamic memory support especially object cache. 
OOMIPS is one of architectures that support object oriented dynamic memory management [7]. In that 
architecture allocation and releasing of the dynamic memory is done by messaging system. This 
message line is a direct communication among processor, object cache and main memory. But this 
communication system is not optimized because of message management overheads. For this reason, we 
are proposed object memory management operations that can do these duties. The OBJ.n instruction is 
responsible for allocating new object space in heap memory and OBJ.r removes data objects that have 
been used, from dynamic memory. 
The main reason that we need object memory instructions is to reduce memory management time and 
save wasted memory that is occupied by useless object elements [7]. Using these object memory 
instructions in object oriented architecture can reduce garbage in dynamic memory. This problem is 
caused by programmers and in programming language steps that grant users the availabilities related to 
allocating dynamic memory. For instance, assume that in an endless loop we allocate heap memory to an 
object. But after that object’s functionality is done, the object stays in heap memory until program is 
died. Often programmers only allocate the memory space and most of these situations, programming 
language is responsible for managing data objects in dynamic memory. In this framework we are trying 
to use object instructions to quickly support memory management.  
3.3. 
Through the Codes 
In this subsection we are going to review a simple example of code executing on TYPELINE. A very 
intelligent approach is clustering. It means that user defined and independent datatype operations can be 
executed simultaneously into one cluster. This idea comes from VMWare code translation to handle 
heavy exits between privileged and de-privileged instructions [23]. We use this idea with some 
difference in implementation. PEN instruction is determined cluster beginning and maximum capacity 
of a cluster should not exceed 4 datatype operations. 
Figure 5 is shown a simple code execution steps through TYPELINE. The first green triangle 
represents compilation step. Vector mode is prepared for uniform datatype loading and is began from 
first integer load operation to the end of current cluster. The cluster size is chosen dynamic. But it is 
important to know that cluster members in memory operations should not exceed 16 (according to 
register constraints) and also in arithmetic and logical operation should not be up to 4. 
As mentioned rules, we have two clusters in these codes. First is about load operations and second is 
arithmetic operation. Notice that in load clusters all members should be in the same category and in 
operation clusters, members should have completely different datatypes (like this example) or all 
members should have common datatype. In this code we have two cluster that can be ran 
simultaneously. But the result of execution is more significant. In first cluster with spending one LD.in 
operation clock cycles, we can load four registers simultaneously.  
Also in second cluster we faced to parallel execution of ADD.in and DIV.ft. CONV instruction can be 
executed in 1 cycle and overall cycles for executing this cluster is equivalent to 1+DIV.ft. It is because 
ADD.in absolutely takes less cycles than DIV.ft and one cycle is needed to prepare configuration for 
type conversion unit. In addition, it is saved (3*LD.in+DIV.ft+1) cycles to run this code region. If the 
various datatype operations are distributed in a higher level among code regions or the number of 
specific datatype grows in code regions, the TYPELINE works better and idle process lines will be 
decreased. As idle lines decrease, the entire performance will be enhanced directly. Here, performance 
enhancement is related to overall speedup of the TYPELINE. This is the direct result of parallel 
execution 
and 
cycle 
reduction.
 
 
Figure 5: It shows code execution steps through a simple example. After translation and compilation steps in 
parallel mode, two of process lines get idle and only two real parallel execution exist. Red triangles represents idle 
and useless computation channels in this example. 
 
4. Experimental Results 
In this section we are going to review TYPELINE effects on three aspects of execution 
include load parallelism, computational parallelism and reducing code execution cycles 
through standard benchmarks and experimental statistics.  
After the compilation process is completely done, it is time to prepare codes for 
execution. This preparation include some optimization steps that is related directly to 
programming language and also compiler that is used to cluster machine codes. The 
order of machine codes have maximum side effect on number of parallelism in load 
instructions. This is because we cluster code regions with respect to their order in 
original source code. If the order can be changed by compilers, final results may 
increase approximately to 5%. The main factor in computational instruction parallelism 
is to have uniform datatype operations in code regions or number of complex datatypes, 
user defines and structures increase. Using datatypes according to process lines support 
can enhance overall performance and decreases entire time that process lines get idle.  
Figure 6 indicates approximate load parallelism, computation parallelism and cycle 
reduction in different benchmarks. As shown in (a) raytracer has the best parallelism 
availability in load instructions and the FSS is the bad one. Average parallelism in load 
instruction is about 40%. As mentioned, the parallelism in load instructions is directly 
related to the code orders and type of load instructions that come continuously. Due to 
the section three, raytracer has the best distribution in type of operations and FSS 
despite to have strong datatype operations but distribution of load instructions is very 
sparse and this is the main reason that its code regions is not compatible with 
parallelism concepts in TYPELINE architecture. So uniform load instructions is seen in 
application- specific environments more than others. 
 
In (b) it is presented that computation parallelism is so lower than load instructions. In 
average, parallelism is about 18%. It means benchmark with various functionalities are 
not main target of TYPELINE architecture. Consequently two types of applications are 
appropriate for TYPELINE architecture. First is the applications that their datatype 
operations behave uniformly. Second target is applications that use approximate normal 
distribution of datatype operations. These application almost have user define datatypes 
and data structures. The best result in this part is referred to raytracer by approximately 
28% and finally the worst result is related to btree with 11%. The here we can discuss 
about these result. In raytracer code regions, datatype operations have better distribution 
status in comparison with others. Btree uses only two of SDTs and should be 
appropriate for execution in TYPELINE. But when we have a look into the code 
regions, it is clear that execution codes according to datatype categories have a bad 
distribution and is not compatible with parallelism concepts of TYPELINE. The 
average parallelism percent is about 18%. 
By parallelization that occur in various benchmarks, the reduction of execution cycles 
is computed approximately. The average percentage of cycle reduction is about 20%. It 
is very significant to know reasons of cycle reduction. In application-specific 
environments like raytracer benchmark that datatypes are distributed in a better way, all 
load and computational instructions are more effective in interaction to the process 
lines. The overall cycle reduction is led to enhance entire speed of execution. 
The last point in this section is to review traditional execution out of TYPELINE. In 
the mentioned benchmarks, percentage of miss-handling is varied from 2% to 5%. This 
datatype operations include pointers and special type definitions that are not compatible 
with process lines that should handle in traditional process line. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 6: Experimental result after compilation process. (a) It shows load instruction parallelism 
under various benchmarks. The average parallelization is about 40% (b) Indicates instruction 
parallelism in computational area. Instructions include arithmetic and logical operation is given 
here. (c) Estimated cycle reduction due to parallelization and also datatype operation clustering. 
 
5. Comparison and Analysis 
In this section we compare TYPELINE with other prior works in this area. So it is 
shown that application-specific target like DNS servers are most suitable for 
implementation in process lines so the overall performance depends on this selection. 
Previous works like conservation core and Truffle in energy-efficient category, Parkour 
and Kremlin in parallelism and OOMIPS in are the main targets to compare with 
current architecture. 
5.1. 
Parallelism 
In this area we face to two categories in previous efforts. First is software optimization 
to know what regions in codes are deserved to parallelism and should be able to parallel 
execution. The Kremlin is work similar this [12]. The framework include discovery and 
planning before execution is applied by Kremlin tool. Instead Parkour is work on 
parallelization implementation on AMD 32-cores and it emphasized on performance 
[11]. 
TYPELINE parallelism procedure is focused on both software and hardware level. 
Notice that in comparison with Parkour that is tested by 32 and 64 parallel cores, 
TYPELINE is only implemented in four parallel process lines. In code optimization 
level it uses datatype operation clusters in two architecture support that is divided into 
load instruction clustering and computational instruction clustering. In average load 
instruction parallelism is about 18% and computational instruction parallelism is up to 
40%. TYPELINE performance in parallelism is directly depends on datatype operation 
distribution. In environments like application specific programs, the overall parallelism 
improves. 
5.2. 
Speed-up and Energy-efficiency 
Accelerators are provided to speedup code execution. They reduce overall execution 
time with respect to architecture support in target applications. According to the 
parallelism results of TYPELINE and cycle reduction, it reduces overall cycles needed 
to execution about 20%. It leads to reduce CPI and improves speed of execution in 
general applications. It is important to know which code region and which datatype 
operation improve execution speed. 
Another aspect is energy-efficiency. Some prior works in this area include Truffle and 
conservation core [1, 2]. C-core is an energy-efficient architecture that is synthesis-
enabled and can be configured or patch in new situations. But TYPELINE have 
architecture support by using instruction set for each process line. This feature improves 
reliability of execution. First advantage is to have more flexibility in various types of 
codes and the second is better performance in process lines that only a few part of code 
regions cannot be supported in precise mode. This amount is changed from 2% up to 
5%. Also Truffle is used low-power technique that works in two precise and 
approximate mode. This feature also can be implemented in TYPELINE. We can assign 
specific operational voltage to each process line. This comes from datatype features that 
are needed to handle the same operation groups. Using this technique can be one of the 
future works in this area to detect optimized the voltage of datatype operation. 
5.3. 
TYPELINE and Dark Silicon Problem 
The dark silicon constraints are effected on hardware/software design. The main problem is 
related to power that is needed to charge all silicones and also thermal management in 
processors [20, 24]. As mentioned before, when design space grows, we should ensure that all 
parallel units can be used with the same power resource. For example in 90 nm TSCM we can 
only use about 17% of silicones in the same time. This is optimization problem. In TYPELINE 
architecture, it is ensured that parallel execution units cannot exceed this amount. Although this 
should not be considered as a solution for Dark Silicon problem, but still this can be a 
prevention to use the entire available facilities. Also in future works that can be focused on 
energy-efficiency, TYPELINE will be a solution for Dark Silicon problem. 
5.4. 
Application- Specific Review 
In some aspects of modern industrial, computation-intensive applications and pervasive 
computing, datatype architecture can be a good target. These environments are almost 
application-specific. This feature is best for TYPELINE architecture implementation. As 
mentioned before, DNS servers and data center applications are most common targets of 
TYPELINE especially on energy-efficiency and Green computing area [25]. We know that 
every day billions of queries are submitted to the DNS servers and they response to them as a 
routine way. DNS datatype operations are uniform and can be modeled so easily. Another is 
modern vehicles that need more support on data acquisition and related area [26]. A very 
important area that is completely compatible to the TYPELINE and datatype theory is pervasive 
computing [27]. The idea behind this, is to propagate datatype operations among processors 
especially through CAN networks. Consider that we have some processors with various 
functionalities according to the target applications. Each processor that support operations in its 
own area, can also support other processors by its own datatype operations. So in this network, 
datatypes that are most common can be supported by maximum number of processors and the 
speed of computing will be enhanced due to datatype architecture design in uniform 
environments. 
6. Conclusion 
As operation datatype features in standard benchmarks, SDTs are extracted for implementation 
step. For each datatype operation have considered special process line. These process lines were 
responsible for computing operations that are supported by the same datatype. TYPELINE 
architecture is constructed with some process lines, register files related to each process line and 
finally TEUs that are responsible for executing instructions. TEUs are designed due to datatype 
features. In this procedure, more design space is dedicated to common datatypes and 
consequently more instructions are dedicated in the proposed ISA. Experimental results show 
that average parallelism can be improved in load instructions to 40% and in computation 
instructions up to 18%. Also it caused overall cycle reduction to the 20%.  
It is shown that uniform and application-specific environments are the best targets for 
TYPELINE. These types of applications can improve overall performance of the framework 
with respect to better datatype operation distribution. Consequently it provides architecture 
support for complex data types that are constructed of the common datatypes. Structures, user-
defined datatypes and arrays are the main supported features in this area. Also it shows that 
code dependencies can be more easily managed and clustered by datatype operations in both 
static and dynamic steps. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ganesh Venkatesh, Jack Sampson, Nathan Goulding, Saturnino Garcia, Vladyslav Bryksin, Jose 
Lugo-Martinez, Steven Swanson, Michael Bedford Taylor. Conservation cores: Reducing the energy 
of mature computations, In proceedings of the fifteenth edition of ASPLOS on Architectural support 
for programming languages and operating systems, Pages 205-218, 2010. 
[2] H. Esmaeilzadeh, A. Sampson, I. Ceze and D. Burger, Architecture support for disciplined 
approximate programming, In Proceedings of the seventeenth edition of ASPLOS on 
Architectural support for programming languages and operating systems, 2012. 
[3] Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, Adrian Sampson, Luis Ceze, and Doug Burger. The GreenDroid Mobile 
Application Processor: An Architecture for Silicon's Dark Future, Journal of Micro IEEE, Volume 
31, Issue 2, pages 86 – 95, 2011. 
[4] Gennady Pekhimenko, and Kun Qian. Software/Hardware Cooperative Approximate Computation, 
Technical report, Carnegie Mellon University, 2011. 
[5] Manish Arora, Jack Sampson, Nathan Goulding-Hotta, Jonathan Babb, Ganesh Venkatesh, Michael 
Bedford Taylor, and Steven Swanson. Reducing the Energy Cost of Irregular Code Bases in Soft 
Processor Systems, FCCM '11 Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 19th Annual International Symposium 
on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, 2011. 
[6] Jack Sampson, Manish Arora, Nathan Goulding-Hotta, Ganesh Venkatesh, Jonathan Babb, Vikram 
Bhatt, Steven Swanson, and Michael Bedford Taylor, An Evaluation of Selective Depipelining for 
FPGA-Based Energy-Reducing Irregular Code Coprocessors, FPL '11 Proceedings of the 2011 21st 
International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications, Pages 24-29, 2011. 
[7] Weixing JI, Feng SHI, Baojun QIAO, and Muhammad Kamran. The Design of a Novel Object-
oriented Processor: OOMIPS, In Proceeding of IEEE International Conf. on Application -specific 
Systems, Architectures and Processors, ASAP, 2007. 
[8] Martin Schoeberl. Architecture for object-oriented programming languages, In Proceedings of the 
5th international workshop on Java technologies for real-time and embedded systems, JTRES '07, 
2007. 
[9] Adrian Sampson, Werner Dietl, Emily Fortuna, Danushen Gnanapragasam, Luis Ceze, and Dan 
Grossman. EnerJ: approximate data types for safe and general low-power computation, In 
proceeding of 32nd ACM SIGPLAN, 2011. 
[10] Chris Lattner. LLVM: a compilation framework for lifelong program analysis & transformation, 
Proceedings of the international symposium on Code generation and optimization: feedback-directed 
and runtime optimization, March 2004.  
[11] Donghwan Jeon, Saturnino Garcia, Chris Louie, and Michael Bedford Taylor. Parkour: Parallel 
Speedup Estimates for Serial Programs, In proceedings of the 3rd USENIX conference on Hot topic 
in parallelism, 2011.  
[12] Saturnino Garcia, Donghwan Jeon, Chris Louie, and Michael Bedford Taylor. Kremlin: Rethinking 
and Rebooting gprof for the Multicore Age, In proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN conference 
on Programming language design and implementation, Pages 458-469, 2011. 
[13] Greg Morrisett, Karl Craryy, Neal Glew, Dan Grossman, Richard Samuels, Frederick Smith, David 
Walker, Stephanie Weirich, and Steve Zdancewic. TALx86: A realistic typed assembly language. In 
ACM Workshop on Compiler Support for System Software, pages 25–35, 1999. 
[14] Rose Tate, Juan Chen, and Chris Hawblitzel. Inferable object-oriented typed assembly language, In 
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming language design and 
implementation, Pages 424-435, 2010. 
[15] Lisa Wu, Martha A. Kim, and Stephen A. Edwards. Cache Impacts of Datatype Acceleration, IEEE 
COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE LETTERS, Volume 11, NO 1, 2012. 
[16] Hongjiu Lu. ELF: From the Programmer's Perspective, NYNEX Science & Technology, Inc. White 
Plains, NY 10604, USA, 1995. 
[17]  Wei Hu, Tianzhou Chen, Nan Zhang, and Jijun Ma. Adjust ELF Format for Multi-core Architecture, 
In proceeding of International Conference on Electronic Computer Technology, 2009. 
[18] Sanjaya Kumar, James H. Aylor, Barry W. Johnson, and Wm. A. Wulf, Object-oriented techniques in 
hardware design, IEEE Journal of Computer, Volume 27, Issue 6, 1994. 
[19] Tsahee Zidenberg, Isaac Keslassy, and Uri Weiser, MULTIAMDAHL: HOW SHOULD I DIVIDE 
MY HETEROGENOUS CHIP? , IEEE COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE LETTERS, Volume 11, NO 
2, 2012. 
[20] Michael B. Taylor, Is Dark Silicon Useful? Harnessing the Four Horsemen of the Coming Dark 
Silicon Apocalypse, In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Design Automation Conference, Pages 1131-
1136, 2012. 
[21] Massoud Pedram, and Afshin Abdollahi, Low Power RT-Level Synthesis Techniques: A Tutorial, 
Journal of Computers and Digital Techniques, Volume 152, Issue 3, Pages 333 – 343, 2005. 
[22] Alpha 21264 Microprocessor Hardware Reference Manual, Version 4.2, Compaq Computer 
Corporation, 1999. 
[23] Ole Agesen, Jim Mattson, Radu Rugina, and Jeffrey Sheldon, Software Techniques for Avoiding 
Hardware Virtualization Exits, In Proceedings of the USENIX conference on Annual Technical 
Conference, Pages 35-35, 2012. 
[24] Ganesh Venkatesh, Jack Sampson, Nathan Goulding-Hotta, Sravanthi Kota Venkata, Michael 
Bedford Taylor, and Steven Swanson, QSCORES: Trading Dark Silicon for Scalable Energy 
Efficiency with Quasi-Specific Cores, Proceedings of the 44th Annual IEEE/ACM International 
Symposium on Microarchitecture, Pages 163-174, 2011. 
[25] Isabella Cerutti, Pier Giorgio Raponi, Nicola Andriolli, Piero Castoldi, and Odile Liboiron-
Ladouceur, Designing Energy-Efficient Data Center Networks Using Space-Time Optical 
Interconnection Architectures, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, Volume 19, 
NO 2, 2013. 
[26] Li Nan, Zhou Zhou, Li Qingjiang, Yin Qinghong, Sun Zhaolin, Xu Xin, and Xu Hui, Design and 
Implementation of Embedded Data Acquisition System for Mobile Vehicle, In proceeding of 
International Conference on Optoelectronics and Image Processing (ICOIP), Pages 380 – 383, 2010. 
[27] S. M. Arun Prakash, and T. Naveen, Pervasive Computing Application in Vehicular Technology, In 
Proceedings of the National Conference on Innovations in Emerging Technology, Pages 165-169, 
2011. 
 
 
Mehran Alidoost Nia was born in Rasht, Iran in 1989. He studied computer 
software engineering at the University of Guilan in Rasht, Iran. He got his B.Sc 
degree in 2012 and at the same year he was accepted to follow his masters’ 
study under exceptional talent office at Guilan University. His Msc project is 
about energy-efficient computer design using datatype modeling. His research 
interests include Energy-efficient Architectures, Advanced Datatype, Cloud 
Computing, Green Computing and Computer Security. 
 
Reza Ebrahimi Atani was born in Arak, Iran. He studied Electronics 
Engineering at the University of Guilan in Rasht, Iran. He got his B.Sc degree 
in 2002 and at the same year he was accepted to follow his masters study at Iran 
University of Science & Technology (IUST) in Tehran, Iran. He joined the 
Electronics Research Center of IUST and received the M.Sc degree in 
Electronics-VLSI design in 2004. He received the Ph.D. degree in 2010 where 
he worked on "Design and Implementation of a stream cipher for mobile 
communications" as his PhD dissertation. He has an assistant professor position 
in Department of Computer Engineering at the University of Guilan. His 
research interests include Cryptology, Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded 
Systems (CHES), Computer and Network security, Information Hiding. 
 
