Developing Effective Community Network Analysis Tools According to
Visualization Psychology
Darren J. Edwards*
Swansea University, UK
Min Chen†
University of Oxford, UK
Healthcare 
Sociology 
data capture 
community 
network 
Psychology 
health psychology 
visualization psychology 
data visualization 
data analysis 
data modelling 
information 
dissemination 
informed decisions 
and actions 
aid 
aid 
Figure 1: Data visualization can aid community network analysis in health psychology, while visualization psychology can aid the
improvement and optimization of data visualization processes.
1
INTRODUCTION
Community network analysis is advancing in areas of sociology and
geography, but remains largely undiscovered in the realm of health
psychology. The outbreak of COVID-19 around the world highlights
the critical roles that community networks can play in social and
psychological health and wellbeing. Network visualization is an
energetic subarea of visualization. It is an indispensable technology
for supporting community network analysis, aiding psychologists
of all backgrounds in examining community organizational effects
on wellbeing. Meanwhile, visualization psychology is a new branch
of applied psychology1, which aims to study the effects of visu-
alization on different stakeholders in data intelligence workﬂows.
As illustrated in Figure 1, visualization psychology can, in return,
aid visualization scientists to design better visualization tools for
the practitioners in all disciplines in general and those in health
psychology in particular. In this paper, we reﬂect on the importance
and potential impact of developing visualization psychology in the
context of community network analysis.
The recent developments of social networks have shaped a new
global ecosystem where individuals are linked more closely, and
their impact on wellbeing has been recognized [5]. In social neuro-
science, it has been observed that speciﬁc areas of the brain, which
are activated on the basis of social connection, link the need for
connection with wellbeing on one level [10]. On another level,
this contrasts with diminished values, connection to others, particu-
larly at a societal level, which may have been brought about by the
acceptance of neo-liberal ideals, promoting individualism, and self-
promotion [6]. There is growing evidence of the individuals, and
their relationship with their environment, to explain causal functions
of wellbeing [8, 11, 12]. Given this, then a greater methodologi-
cal drive for evidencing such interrelated connections are perhaps
needed, and within the areas of health, social, clinical, and environ-
*e-mail: d.j.edwards@swansea.ac.uk
†e-mail: min.chen@oerc.ox.ac.uk
1To our best knowledge, the term of “visualization psychology” was
ﬁrst suggested in [1,2] and the IEEE VIS 2020 Workshop on Visualization
Psychology signiﬁed the establishment of this new subject.
mental psychology.
2
COMMUNITY NETWORK ANALYSIS: A DISCUSSION FROM
THE PERSPECTIVE OF VISUALIZATION PSYCHOLOGY
In community network analysis, commonly based on graph the-
ory, analytical algorithms are used to identify possible connections
among individuals and different community groups [14]. There are
numerous data mining metrics for determining if two individuals
are related and should be connected in a community network. One
of such metrics utilizes Cohen’s κ coefﬁcient, which is a similarity
measure for categorical data and has been traditionally applied to
data mining in the form of cluster analysis, network link prediction,
and in understanding how the mind manages information in catego-
rization research [7]. The resultant networks are typically depicted
using node-link diagrams for disseminating the analytical results to
the public or informing the relevant decision makers.
In healthcare and health psychology, such a data intelligence
workﬂow can aid community healthcare professionals in (i) monitor-
ing and managing mental wellbeing in the society, (ii) conducting
various operations in epidemic management (e.g., contact tracing,
risk assessment, and intervention planning), and evaluating and
optimizing various theory-based and data-driven models. While
visualizing and exploring such analytically-constructed community
networks can be very useful, there are many unanswered questions
in visualization psychology, which suggest that the above workﬂow
from data to analysis, then visualization, and ﬁnally decision may
not be as dependable as it appears. For example, these questions
may concern the following cognitive aspects:
a. Trust. When a potential connection between two individuals
is depicted as a solid line, it may induce a sense of trust of
the analytical metric used to determine the connection. In
many practical situations, such a metric can be rather unre-
liable. Many applications in visual analytics (a sub-ﬁeld of
visualization) have shown that the chance of false positive and
false negative can be rather high in some situations.
b. Spatial Reasoning. Because human heuristics instinctively
use spatial distance to reason about closeness, the proximity
between nodes in a node-link diagram often misleads some
viewers to perceive the level of similarity or association be-
tween nodes. It is not known whether it demands some extra
cognitive effort to suppress such instinct.
arXiv:2010.00488v1  [cs.HC]  1 Oct 2020
c Working Memory. The changes of a network are commonly
visualized with animation, which is known to be inefﬁcient for
supporting in-depth observation and analysis because of the
limited working memory capacity.
d. Visual Search. Forced directed graph drawing is a popular
visualization technique, and many viewers are impressed by
the animated convergence from an arbitrary layout to a layout
based on the edge weights. However, because the spatial loca-
tions of nodes are unstable, it usually demands extra cognitive
effort in cases where users need to perform visual search tasks.
e. Motivation. When modellers using visualization for depicting
simulation results, there is often a “mental conﬂict” between
using visualization to convince others to accept the prediction
by the model, and using visualization to evaluate the model
and validate the ﬁndings.
f. Conﬁdence. Many professionals in healthcare often felt inad-
equate in front of analytical conclusions resulting from math-
ematical modelling, and may sometimes be prevented from
using their knowledge and initiatives in operation management.
One may hypothesize the beneﬁt of using visualization in eval-
uating and scrutinizing such analytical conclusions (see also
(e)), or on the contrary, the shortcoming of using visualization
if it may induce unjustiﬁable trust (see also (a)).
There are numerous phenomena in the ﬁeld of visualization and
many visualization applications are waiting to be studied in visual-
ization psychology. Meanwhile, with effective visualization, we can
address many challenges in health psychology, including:
1. In the context of epidemic management, (i) advising the cur-
rent state of social engagement of individual persons for whom
medical and healthcare professionals have recommended to in-
crease and maintain a certain level/form of social engagement
for their well-being; (ii) improving cognitive effectiveness
and efﬁciency in monitoring process, and addressing issues
such as inattentional blindness, limited working memory, poor
collaboration and communication between healthcare workers.
2. In community care management, to enable individuals to ob-
serve their own social engagement, in order to, e.g., motivate
them to increase or decrease a certain type of social engage-
ment. The following may be important: (a) being motivated
by others who are in a similar situation; (b) being able to reach
out to others who are in a similar situation or can offer help;
(c) feeling rewarded by adhering to a treatment plan through
a community network. The cognitive considerations include
emotion and motivation as well as many aspects of social
psychology.
3
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, it is highly desirable for medical and healthcare profes-
sionals to be able to use visualization as part of their data intelligence
workﬂows. The beneﬁts of visualization are evident in many other
applications. On the other hand, the uses of visualization techniques
in healthcare and health psychology can beneﬁt from research in
visualization psychology, which will facilitate the development of
more effective and efﬁcient visualization techniques. Information
theory has provided explanation why visualization can complement
the limitation of machine-centric processes (e.g., statistics, algo-
rithms, and machine learning) in data intelligence workﬂows [4].
Cognitive studies have shown that visualization empower human
viewers to use their knowledge to make up for the shortcomings of
machine-centric processes, e.g., [9]. It has been postulated that the
mathematical rationale for visualization may be applicable to many
phenomena in psychology [3].
However, there are not yet many empirical studies on advanced
visualization methods in the context of healthcare. There has already
been many visualization applications in healthcare (e.g., [13,15]).
There is an urgent need for such research, which can help deploy
visualization techniques in healthcare through rigorous scientiﬁc pro-
cesses, while improving out scientiﬁc understanding in visualization
psychology. While we should continue to develop new visualization
tools for healthcare professionals, including health psychologists, in
parallel, we should make a serious effort to understand the cognitive
beneﬁts and shortcomings of using forms of visualization. In many
ways, health psychologists are in a unique position, where they have
the mandate to deploy visualization techniques, the opportunities to
collect observational data about the effectiveness of visualization,
and the knowledge to relate their observation to the fundamental
theories in psychology.
In conclusion, because visualization applications in healthcare
are typically risk-averse, health psychologists can play a signiﬁcant
role in ensuring appropriate and effective uses of visualization tech-
niques in healthcare. Health psychologists are thus at the center
of the triangle of “health science”, “visualization technology”, and
“visualization psychology”, and can enable the two-way knowledge
ﬂow depicted in Figure 1.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Abdul-Rahman, R. Borgo, M. Chen, D. J. Edwards, and B. Fisher.
Juxtaposing controlled empirical studies in visualization with topic
developments in psychology. arXiv 1909.03786, 2019.
[2] A. Abdul-Rahman, M. Chen, and D. H. Laidlaw. A survey of variables
used in empirical studies for visualization. In Foundations of Data
Visualization. Springer, 2020.
[3] M. Chen. Cost-beneﬁt analysis of data intelligence – its broader inter-
pretations. In Advances in Info-Metrics: Information and Information
Processing across Disciplines. OUP, New York, 2020.
[4] M. Chen and A. Golan.
What may visualization processes opti-
mize? IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
22(12):2619–32, 2016.
[5] N. A. Christakis and J. H. Fowler. Connected: The Surprising Power
of Our Social Networks and How They Shape Our Lives. Little, Brown
Spark, 2009.
[6] O. Gruebner, M. A. Rapp, M. Adli, U. Kluge, S. Galea, and
A. Heinz. Cities and mental health. Deutsches ¨Arzteblatt Interna-
tional, 114(8):121, 2017.
[7] M. Hoffman, D. Steinley, K. M. Gates, M. J. Prinstein, and M. J. Br-
usco. Detecting clusters/communities in social networks. Multivariate
Behavioral Research, 53(1):57–73, 2018.
[8] A. H. Kemp, J. A. Arias, and Z. Fisher. Social ties, health and wellbeing:
a literature review and model. In Neuroscience and Social Science, pp.
397–427. Springer, 2017.
[9] N. Kijmongkolchai, A. Abdul-Rahman, and M. Chen. Empirically
measuring soft knowledge in visualization. Computer Graphics Forum,
36(3):73–85, 2017.
[10] M. D. Lieberman. Social: Why our Brains are Wired to Connect. OUP,
Oxford, 2013.
[11] J. Mead, Z. Fisher, L. Wilkie, K. Gibbs, J. Pridmore, J. Tree, and
A. Kemp. Rethinking wellbeing: Toward a more ethical science of
wellbeing that considers current and future generations. Authorea,
2019.
[12] G. Mortal. Global, regional, and national age-sex speciﬁc all-cause
and cause-speciﬁc mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990-2013: a
systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2013. Lancet,
385(9963):117–71, 2015.
[13] B. Preim and K. Lawonn. A survey of visual analytics for public health.
Computer Graphics Forum, 39(1):543–580, 2020.
[14] F. Radicchi, C. Castellano, F. Cecconi, V. Loreto, and D. Parisi. Deﬁn-
ing and identifying communities in networks. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 101(9):2658–63, 2004.
[15] M. Zakkar and K. Sedig. Interactive visualization of public health
indicators to support policymaking: An exploratory study. Online
Journal of Public Health Informatics, 29(2):e190, 2017.
